The Project Gutenberg eBook of Memoirs of the Right Rev. Daniel Corrie, LL.D., first Bishop of Madras
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Memoirs of the Right Rev. Daniel Corrie, LL.D., first Bishop of Madras

Author: Daniel Corrie

Release date: April 14, 2025 [eBook #75863]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Seeley, Burnside, and Seeley, 1847

Credits: Carol Brown, Brian Wilson and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIRS OF THE RIGHT REV. DANIEL CORRIE, LL.D., FIRST BISHOP OF MADRAS ***



                               MEMOIRS

                               OF THE

                   RIGHT REV. DANIEL CORRIE, LL.D.




     [Illustration:
                                                 _Woodman, Sc._
                        _Daniel Corrie, LLD._
                      _First Bishop of Madras._
     London, Published by Seeley & Cᵒ. Fleet Street Janʸ. 1847.]




                               MEMOIRS

                                OF THE

                   RIGHT REV. DANIEL CORRIE, LL.D.

                       FIRST BISHOP OF MADRAS.


         COMPILED CHIEFLY FROM HIS OWN LETTERS AND JOURNALS,

                           BY HIS BROTHERS.


                    SEELEY, BURNSIDE, AND SEELEY,
                         FLEET STREET, LONDON
                             MDCCCXLVII.




                       LEONARD SEELEY, PRINTER,
                            THAMES DITTON.




                              PREFACE.


As the greater portion of these Memoirs of a loved and honoured
brother, have been derived from his own papers, it is hoped that the
risk of representing him other than he really was has, in a great
measure, been avoided. In making use, however, of such materials
as were in the possession of the Editors, they judged it to be
desirable to give somewhat copious details of their brother’s earlier
ministerial labours, because they conceived that it was then that
the principles and motives by which throughout life he desired to be
actuated were most severely tested. The Editors were of opinion, too,
that whilst many of the particulars connected with their brother’s
earlier labours in Northern India, would be new to the great
proportion of the present generation, these records of “the day of
small things” could not be without interest and use to all who may be
engaged in the work of Missions.

To account for the delay attending the appearance of this Volume,
it may be proper to state, that, independently of the time consumed
in the transmission of some papers from India, many unforeseen
circumstances prevented the brother who had undertaken the task,
from preparing any portion of these Memoirs for the press until
August, 1845. At that time it pleased God to visit him with a serious
illness, which ultimately brought him to the grave; and thus the
responsibility of completing what an abler hand had commenced,
devolved on the only surviving brother, who, in his turn, has not
been altogether free from those interruptions which arise out of the
duties and afflictions of ordinary life.

It remains to acknowledge, with thanks, the obligation of the Editors
to the Lord Bishop of Oxford, for the Letters which the subject of
these Memoirs addressed to the Rev. D. Brown, the Rev. H. Martyn, and
the Rev. J. Sargent; to the Lord Bishop of Calcutta, for the account
of the Visitation of the Upper Provinces, which appears in pp. 529
and seq; to the widow of the late Rev. J. Buckworth, for letters
addressed to her husband; and to the Archdeacon Harper for letters
and information connected with the Diocese of Madras. It will be seen
also, that the Editors of these Memoirs have been much indebted to
the correspondence of their brother with Mr. Sherer, of the Bengal
Civil Service,--himself recently numbered with the dead who are
waiting for the resurrection to eternal life.

  _January 28, 1847._




                              CONTENTS.


                             CHAPTER I.

   HIS EARLY LIFE--AND MINISTRATIONS.                      _page 1_

                             CHAPTER II.

   DEPARTURE FOR INDIA--VOYAGE--ARRIVAL AT CALCUTTA.      _page 23_

                            CHAPTER III.

   AT ALDEEN--APPOINTED TO CHUNAR.                        _page 47_

                             CHAPTER IV.

   SETTLEMENT AT CHUNAR.                                  _page 65_

                             CHAPTER V.

   RESIDENCE AT CHUNAR.                                   _page 88_

                             CHAPTER VI.

   VISIT TO CALCUTTA--ARRIVAL OF HIS SISTER.             _page 118_

                            CHAPTER VII.

   REMOVES FROM CHUNAR--ARRIVES AT CAWNPORE--ILLNESS OF
     MRS. MARTYN.                                        _page 140_

                            CHAPTER VIII.

   RESIDENCE AT CAWNPORE.                                _page 178_

                             CHAPTER IX.

   CAWNPORE--COEL--RETURN TO CALCUTTA.                   _page 201_

                             CHAPTER X.

   CALCUTTA.                                             _page 227_

                             CHAPTER XI.

   AGRA.                                                 _page 245_

                            CHAPTER XII.

   VOYAGE TO ENGLAND.                                    _page 280_

                            CHAPTER XIII.

   RETURN TO CALCUTTA.                                   _page 295_

                            CHAPTER XIV.

   REMOVAL TO CALCUTTA.                                  _page 320_

                             CHAPTER XV.

   CAWNPORE--CALCUTTA--RETURN OF MR. THOMASON--DEATH OF
     BISHOP HEBER.                                       _page 371_

                            CHAPTER XVI.

   ARRIVAL OF BISHOP JAMES--CONSECRATION OF THE BISHOP’S
     COLLEGE--DEATH OF BISHOP JAMES--VISIT TO THE UPPER
     PROVINCES.                                          _page 415_

                            CHAPTER XVII.

   GOVERNMENT RETRENCHMENTS--PLAN FOR A COLLEGE--DEATH OF
     MR. THOMASON--ABOLITION OF SUTTEE--ARRIVAL OF BISHOP
     TURNER.                                             _page 446_

                           CHAPTER XVIII.

   DISQUIETUDE CONCERNING THE ANGLO-HINDOO COLLEGE--DEATH
     OF BISHOP TURNER.                                   _page 481_

                            CHAPTER XIX.

   ARRIVAL OF BISHOP WILSON--BAPTISM OF NATIVES--
     ORDINATIONS--VISITATION OF THE UPPER PROVINCES.     _page 519_

                             CHAPTER XX.

   DELAY IN HIS NOMINATION TO THE BISHOPRIC--NARROW ESCAPE
     FROM DEATH--SUMMONED TO ENGLAND--VISITS THE CAPE AND
     ST. HELENA--HIS CONSECRATION--INTERVIEW WITH THE
     KING--ARRIVAL IN MADRAS--VISIT TO TANJORE AND
     TINNEVELLY.                                         _page 563_

                            CHAPTER XXI.

   CHURCH-BUILDING FUND--SUBSCRIPTIONS FOR THE IRISH
     CLERGY--THE MADRAS GRAMMAR SCHOOL--MEMORIAL TO
     GOVERNMENT--PRIMARY VISITATION--DEATH OF MRS.
     CORRIE--ORDINATION--DEATH OF BISHOP CORRIE.         _page 603_




                              MEMOIRS,

                                ETC.




                               MEMOIRS,

                              ETC. ETC.




                             CHAPTER I.

                  HIS EARLY LIFE--AND MINISTRATIONS.


Daniel Corrie, the subject of this Memoir, was born on the 10th of
April 1777, and was the eldest surviving son of the late Rev. John
Corrie, for many years Curate of Colsterworth, in the county of
Lincoln, and Vicar of Osbournby in the same county, and afterwards
Rector of Morcott, in the county of Rutland. The history of the early
part of Mr. Corrie’s life will be best told by the following extract
from his private Journal, dated on his twenty-seventh birthday:--

     “Alas, when I look back, what a dreary waste appears!
     Seventeen years spent at home without a thought of God or
     salvation, though I had the benefit of family worship,
     and abundance of good advice. The succeeding four years
     I spent with Mr. E.,[1] principally in London, and its
     neighbourhood, exposed to every temptation. The first
     serious resolution I made of reformation was on the night
     of February 10, 1798, on which I heard of my mother’s
     death, which, occurring suddenly, was a great shock to
     me. I loved her most dearly, and had much reason to do
     so. Being totally ignorant, however, of my own depravity,
     and in darkness as it regarded the work of the Redeemer,
     I soon broke all my resolutions. In May 1798, I returned
     to my father: and, being removed from my temptations, I
     was in hope of effectually reforming myself; but, alas!
     on every convenient occasion, I became the prey of my
     former temptations. In the October of that year, we removed
     from Colsterworth to Grantham, where I became still more
     strict, attending every month at the Lord’s Table; but
     I was still ignorant of the way of salvation. In the
     summer of 1799, I was entered of Clare Hall, Cambridge;
     and before going into residence, I met frequently with
     Mr. G. N., who took much pains to direct my views aright;
     but I obstinately withstood him, and succeeded too
     fatally, I fear, in hardening C. against his admonitions.
     Still, I was destitute of true peace, and determined on
     greater strictness, such as fasting and penance, &c. &c.
     I went into residence at Cambridge, October 1799; but
     instead of further reformation, I spent my first year
     in a round of dissipation. Still, however, I maintained
     appearances, being seldom out of gates after ten o’clock,
     or being absent from chapel. I went occasionally to
     Trinity Church,[2] though I was much disgusted with what
     I heard there. During the summer of 1800, I had time for
     reflection, and returned to college in the autumn, with
     some faint desires of doing better. At Christmas of that
     year, I was appointed to an exhibition at Trinity Hall,
     and removed thither in the January of 1801. I now began
     to feel a growing attachment to Mr. Simeon’s ministry,
     although I seldom ventured to take a seat. Returning home
     in June 1801, reformed in a great degree in my outward
     conduct, and with desires the world could not satisfy,
     it was my happiness to find John Buckworth,[3] at his
     father’s; who, taking me to visit some religious people,
     I insensibly began to love their society, and to perceive
     that it was the way of life I desired to follow. I reflect
     with much gratitude on the kindness and forbearance of my
     friend Buckworth, who led me on by degrees, till I ventured
     to speak to him of my state; and from that time I have
     experienced a pleasure in the ways of God before unknown.
     Yet, alas! I began to be proud; and returned to college
     in October 1801 full of self-conceit. I now attended
     Trinity Church regularly; but my walk was very uneven.
     About Christmas I fell grievously, and continued for
     about a fortnight full of terror, and without resolution
     to proceed. It pleased the Lord, however, to raise me up
     again; and since that period I have had no distressing
     apprehensions respecting God’s willingness, and the
     Saviour’s sufficiency, to save to the uttermost.”

With reference to what Mr. Corrie terms in the foregoing extract, a
grievous fall, he expressed himself to his friend Buckworth, in a
letter dated Dec. 25, 1801, as follows:--

     “I was too forward and presumptuous in my notions of
     acceptance with God, and of an interest in the Saviour; and
     God has thus left me to myself, to prove to me the pride
     and deceit of my heart. I have been ashamed of my Saviour,
     and he has withdrawn from me the sense of His presence; and
     dismay and a fearful looking for of judgment has taken
     possession of my soul. Yet the anxiety and longing after
     His presence, which I feel, leads me to hope that He will
     not cast me off for ever. God, Thou knowest my heart: Thou
     knowest that I trust not in my own self for strength to
     serve Thee. O shut not Thy merciful ears to my prayers!”

After keeping the usual number of Terms in Cambridge, Mr. Corrie was
ordained Deacon on Trinity Sunday, June 13, 1802, by Dr. Tomline,
Bishop of Lincoln, to the curacy of Buckminster, in the county of
Leicester. His views and feelings with respect to the christian
ministry, are expressed in the following extract from a letter
written about the time of ordination to Mr. Buckworth:--

     “The ministry appears to be indeed an awful undertaking:
     the nearer the time approaches, the more difficult do the
     duties of it appear. At C. the obstacles seem to be greater
     than elsewhere. O for a firm reliance on that grace that
     can overcome all obstacles, and make even a bed of thorns
     easy!”

Shortly after Mr. Corrie had been ordained to the curacy of
Buckminster, he received an appointment to that of Stoke Rochford
also. On this latter curacy he resided, until in 1806 he accepted a
chaplaincy to the East India Company; and his correspondence with Mr.
Buckworth, affords us some notices of his early ministerial life. In
a letter dated November 10, 1802, he writes,

     “I yesterday met a large party from Skillington at N.’s.
     You know I never was among them before. I felt little
     edification: their manner of expression, and many passages
     in their hymns, were not in unison with my frame. I felt
     not that ‘Nature’s last agony was o’er;’ or that ‘all was
     torn from my bleeding heart;’ but thought that ‘would to
     God this were my experience!’ O that I might love Him
     supremely--that I might burn with love in return for His
     matchless goodness! But, what I most objected to was a
     hymn, beginning, ‘Abraham when _severely_ tried,’ and in
     the third line, ‘He with the _harsh_ command complied.’
     I may not be correct in any except the _marked_ words;
     but surely nothing can be ‘severe,’ or ‘harsh,’ which
     proceeds from a God of love, who is engaged to make all
     things work together for our good. Send me word, dear B.
     what you think of these things: whether these remarks
     are not the offspring of a captious and weak head; or
     whether it is an artifice of Satan to prevent me from
     profiting by their company; for, certain it is, I feel
     little of that elevation I have often felt after religious
     conversation. I spent the evening of Sunday at Mrs. B.’s,
     I trust profitably. Some of their relations were there,
     and went away seemingly impressed. May God fix what was
     said on their hearts! I spoke to them from my favourite
     subject, 2 Cor. viii. 9. The subject of our poverty, and
     the way in which we were made rich in Christ, were the
     principal topics I dwelt on. O that He would be pleased
     to own the labours of the very least of his servants, who
     am not worthy to be called a servant! Blessed be He who
     has ‘laid help on one that is mighty;’ and blessed be He
     who knows how to pity our infirmities, and will send his
     Spirit to teach us what to ask for. How my praise for ever
     flows, to the adorable Trinity for that grand scheme of
     redemption! While I write, I feel the efficacy of Christ’s
     atoning blood to purify souls polluted as mine. O when
     shall redemption in its fullest import appear! When shall
     we begin the triumphant song of the redeemed, ‘To Him who
     loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood!’”


                                                  “March 7, 1803.

     “My time, sorry am I to say, has passed heavily of late.
     Such backwardness to communion with God, such slothfulness
     in His service: so many painful apprehensions with regard
     to temporal inconveniences: so many distressing doubts with
     regard to retaining Stoke! You, perhaps, will not wonder
     when I tell you that, what with inward conflict and outward
     service, I am brought very low; or that these unbelieving
     fears have provoked the Holy Spirit of God to leave me,
     in some measure, to wrestle with those inward and hidden
     corruptions of my heart, which, like a troubled sea, throw
     up mire and dirt in abundance. Yet by this, if by nothing
     else, do I know that the Lord favours me, since my enemies,
     who have assaulted me so continually, have not prevailed
     against me. And though my soul is cast down; yet do I not
     doubt but that, when the Lord sees fit, I shall praise Him,
     and again rejoice in the God of my salvation.

     “You desire to know how I go on, that is, I suppose, how
     the work of the Lord prospers. O that I had more to tell
     you on this head! At Sewstern, I have reason to fear
     that my hopes were too sanguine. Miss N. was last week
     attacked very suddenly with a fainting fit. It happened
     to be the day I was to drink tea with them. I found them
     much alarmed; and, it gave me an opportunity of speaking
     on the necessity of a speedy application to Christ.... May
     the Spirit of God apply it to their hearts! At Easton, I
     was called to visit a woman who has been long confined,
     though till lately unknown to me. I trust that the Lord
     has indeed visited her in mercy. I found her at first in
     a very contented state, supposing, (in her own words),
     that she had ‘a good repenting heart.’ I endeavoured to
     convince her that by nature no one has a repenting heart,
     but on the contrary that it is only evil, yea ‘desperately
     wicked.’ On my return a few days after, I found her in much
     anxiety, saying that she had been deceived in her opinion
     of herself, &c.; and though her doubts are not yet removed,
     I trust she disclaimed all other ground of confidence but
     the Redeemer’s merits. This is matter of much comfort to
     me; and O what comfort that I have myself been taught
     these things! Might I not have been ‘a blind leader of the
     blind.’ Might I not still have been the slave of Satan, and
     been his instrument in destroying souls? ‘O to grace how
     great a debtor!’”


                                                 “April 25, 1803.

     “Soon after my last letter to you, peace began to dawn
     upon my soul; and by imperceptible advances gradually to
     increase. I have since then enjoyed in general a settled
     calm; though of late I have been severely exercised by
     the revival of corruptions which I had hoped were in a
     great measure subdued. The Lord has let me plainly see
     that the seeds of these evils still remain. At the same
     time I have reason to bless His name, who has made me more
     than conqueror. Mr. Newton’s letter on Temptation suits my
     experience on that subject; and it has been the instrument
     of much comfort and strength to me.

     “You perhaps have learned from the newspapers the sudden
     death of Mr. Cholmeley.[4] He was riding with some friends
     near his own house, and fell from his horse in a fit, and
     expired in a few minutes, without speaking a word: he was
     buried last Saturday. How loudly do such providences call
     upon us to be in continual readiness; not only to awake
     from sin, but to be diligent in the improvement of our
     talent, that when our Lord cometh, He may receive His own
     with usury.”


                                     “Colsterworth, June 8, 1803.

     “Your letter directed to High Street, followed me hither. I
     should have answered it sooner, but have been much engaged
     in catechising, attending visitations, &c., besides my
     usual avocations. With yourself, I have to complain of much
     deadness of soul; though I enjoy now and then a passing
     glimpse of the Divine goodness, for which I have much
     reason to be thankful, and which keeps my soul athirst for
     God, and leads me to long for brighter manifestations of
     His love. I cannot but adore the condescension of Jehovah,
     who, I trust, smiles upon my labours, and owns His own work
     in the most worthless of His creatures.”


                                        “Stoke, October 31, 1803.

     “What obligations am I under to you for the part you have
     taken, in leading my feet into the ways of peace! But,
     what infinitely greater obligations do I owe to the Friend
     of Sinners! That name, the ‘Friend of Sinners,’ endears
     the adorable Saviour to my soul; and gladly would I leave
     all things here below to see Him as he is, and love Him
     as I ought. But His time is best: and it is infinite
     condescension that He grants us here some visits of His
     love, and gives us to taste a blessedness begun. When
     I read your letter, I was almost ready to envy you the
     pleasure you must have enjoyed during your stay in London;
     but a little reflection reconciled me to my confined
     situation. Though you were feasted with spiritual dainties,
     yet unless your spiritual appetite was good you would pine
     in the midst of plenty; and, blessed be His name, where He
     creates an appetite, He will surely satisfy it, were it in
     a desert. ‘If Elijah wants food, ravens shall feed him.’...
     I have in general enjoyed much comfort in private, but my
     public duties have not brought me so much consolation. So
     much of self mixes with all I do, that it mars my peace;
     and, I fear, hinders the success of my labours; though it
     seems the highest presumption to limit the Almighty, or to
     suppose that a ‘potsherd of the earth’ should obstruct His
     designs. The Sunday preceding the Fast-day, I endeavoured
     to prepare the minds of the people for that occasion; and
     was happy to find that it was not without effect. The three
     churches were crowded. I took my text from Psalm lix. 1,
     2. I have read lately two of the Homilies, ‘the Homily on
     the Misery of Man,’ and ‘the Homily on Salvation.’ By the
     advice of my father, I reserve the others for the festivals
     for which they are appointed. I hope this may have the
     effect of removing prejudice--the Lord grant it may! I
     can appeal to Him that my desires are to be useful in His
     vineyard. May that sovereign grace be magnified which has
     inspired the desire! Yesterday my father administered the
     Sacrament for me at Buckminster; the number of communicants
     was unusually large, though it is a time of the year in
     which the people do not usually attend in numbers. I hope
     this is a token for good, and an encouragement to persevere
     and wait the Lord’s time....

     “My dear friend, forget me not at the throne of grace:
     thither I always bear you in my mind, and I have much
     need of your prayers, that I may have utterance given me
     to declare the mysteries of the Gospel. This is all that
     is worth living for, to make known the riches of Divine
     grace, and to be instrumental in winning souls to Christ.
     Yet, O what coldness and backwardness I feel even in this
     delightful service!...

     “Did you, my friend, partial as you are, but know the
     thoughts that haunt my soul, and pursue me even into the
     pulpit, your good opinion would, I fear, be turned into
     disgust. But ‘this is a saying worthy of all acceptation,
     that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.’
     This is all my salvation, and all my desire; and this shall
     be all my theme, ‘Worthy is the Lamb that was slain. From
     this hold, Satan has not prevailed to drive me of late. To
     this hold will I cling, for He that is my righteousness is
     also my strength, and in His strength I shall be more than
     conqueror. May the soul of my friend ‘blossom as the rose;
     and be as the garden of the Lord, well watered every where
     and fruitful!’”


                                      “London, December 20, 1803.

     “I rejoice that you seem to expect no further hinderance to
     your ordination at Easter. I hope you will be abundantly
     blessed in your labours, for truly nothing else can satisfy
     a soul thirsting after the honour that comes of God. We
     need much patience, dear B., that after having done the
     will of God we may inherit the promises--

            ‘God moves in a mysterious way,
                His wonders to perform,’

     and, when our finite capacities can discover no good working,
     He is bringing about the purposes of His own will. Often has
     he given my impatient soul to see this: in a moment hushed
     the storm of raging and impetuous passions; and made, even
     when all in prospect seemed gloomy, a great calm. This
     experience has been of great service to me, in enabling me
     to impart consolation to others, and to comfort them with
     the same comfort wherewith I myself have been comforted of
     God. O the heights and depths, and lengths and breadths,
     of the love and condescension of God, to submit, as it were,
     to the caprices of the creatures of His hand, yea, of the
     rebels against His government! ‘Is this the manner of men,
     O Lord?’ I feel, indeed, according to your expression,
     that ‘without all-sufficient grace, quickly would my heart
     return to the indulgence of those things which my judgment
     tells me, are nothing but vanity and sin.’ In the review
     of my experience since I came hither, much cause of praise
     appears. That promise has been very abundantly realized,
     ‘He will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are
     able, but will with the temptation make a way to escape.’
     And having this experience I would gladly ‘cast all my care
     upon Him,’ who, I trust, ‘careth for me,’ in expectation
     that He will ‘keep me by His mighty power through faith
     unto salvation.’”


                                       “Stoke, February 14, 1804.

     “I anticipate much pleasure in your company and from
     hearing you preach in some of my churches. I have, however,
     I trust, learned in some poor measure to ‘cease from man;’
     nor do I expect either pleasure or comfort further than as
     a Divine blessing shall attend our communications. The work
     of the ministry seems to be followed with little effect
     in this place: for my own part, however, I have felt much
     freedom from slavish fear; and have delivered my message
     with boldness. If it were the will of God, I should rejoice
     in some visible effects; but I desire to resign myself to
     His pleasure.

     “The Methodists have at length established preaching at
     Sewstern; and, I understand, some have been brought under
     convictions by their means. If the work be of God, I would
     gladly bid it God speed; and if it be of man, it will
     come to nothing. The ministers of the Established Church
     labour under some disadvantages, from the necessity of
     having so many parishes to attend to, &c.... Every day
     convinces me more of the necessity of subordination in
     religious, as well as civil affairs. The want of this is
     the cause of that mania, if I may so speak, which prevails
     among the Methodists, and bids fair in time to turn them
     all into preachers and no hearers. They seem to look
     upon preaching as the only instrument of conversion, and
     overlook other means, such as reflection, self-examination,
     &c.; hence their various backslidings, falling from grace,
     &c., with the many reproaches that are brought upon the
     gospel thereby. These things make me lament sincerely,
     the defection which, I fear, daily takes place from the
     Establishment. Pure in her doctrines, and apostolic in her
     constitution, our Church seems, indeed, ‘the pillar and
     ground of truth;’ and the best means, under the great Head,
     of keeping men in the simplicity of the gospel. I would
     not, however, say with Mr. D. that there is no salvation
     out of her pale. I would rather pray, earnestly pray,
     for a revival of vital godliness in her sons.... O that
     it would ‘please God to illuminate all Bishops, Priests,
     and Deacons, with true knowledge and understanding of His
     word;’ and enable them to shew its real power both in their
     preaching and living....”


                                                  “April 4, 1804.

     “I should have answered your letter sooner, but have been
     both very unwell and very much engaged. Mrs. B. left this
     life for a better, in the night of the 26th ultimo. I was
     in the house at the time of her departure, and I trust
     profited by the awful event. She was sensible at the last,
     though for some days she had been wandering. Frequently
     during her illness, she confessed that she had no hope
     but in the blood and righteousness of Christ, and wished
     to receive Him as her King to make her holy, as well as
     her Prophet to teach her, and her Priest to atone for her
     transgressions. It was matter of surprise to me to hear
     her express herself with a correctness on the work of the
     Redeemer, which had been unusual to her; and did not seem
     to be expected from one who had become so late in life
     acquainted with the way of salvation. I have felt more than
     I had expected to feel from the departure of one of my most
     constant and attentive hearers. May the effect be lasting!

     “I have of late had reason to bless God for some visible
     testimony of His acceptance of my labours. Soon after you
     left us, I went to visit an old person and his wife at
     Sewstern, and trust that the man is in a hopeful way.
     Some persons at Easton, too, have been awakened, and now
     meet for the purpose of social worship. The multitude,
     alas! continue inattentive: but, one soul saved, and that
     the meanest or weakest of God’s creation, is abundant
     recompense for a life of toil and labour.

     “Last Sunday, I exchanged duty with Mr. G. at W. It is
     grievous to observe so small an attendance at public
     worship. It seems a beacon to warn us of the ill
     consequences of irregularity. When a man shews a contempt
     for the institutions of the church to which he belongs,
     the _profanum vulgus_, though dull enough in general, can
     easily see the motive that keeps him in the church, and
     they learn to despise the person who, for the sake of
     emolument, will continue a member of the church.”

To the foregoing notices of Mr. Corrie’s early ministerial labours,
may be added an extract from his Journal, dated April 10, 1804.

     “On Trinity Sunday, June 13, 1802, I was ordained Deacon.
     I trust I had a desire to do good to the souls of men; but
     it was, as I now perceive, very faint, though I hope my
     labours have not been in vain. And now, O Lord, I desire
     to adore that sovereign grace, which plucked me as a
     brand from the mouth of the devouring flame! I would pour
     out my soul in gratitude, to that dear Redeemer, whose
     intercession has delivered me from so great a death; and
     would bless the Holy and Eternal Spirit who has enlightened
     my dark understanding, so that though I know not the
     hour, nor the day, nor the month, nor even the year, when
     He graciously wrought savingly upon me, yet I can say,
     ‘Whereas I was blind, now I see.’ O Holy, Blessed, and
     glorious Trinity, let thy choicest blessings descend on
     Mr. Simeon, who, regardless of the frowns he might incur,
     faithfully warned me of my danger; and let thy watchful
     Providence ever protect my friend Buckworth, dearer than
     a brother; and, O, pardon my manifold sins! This is all my
     hope, that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all
     sin, and that His Spirit is powerful to subdue the most
     inveterate corruptions.

           ‘On thee alone my hope relies,
            At thy dear cross I fall,
            My Lord, my Life, my Righteousness,
            My Saviour, and my all.’

     Impart to me from thy fulness, and let me evermore be
     abounding in thy work. I trust thou hast given me to
     desire the furtherance of thy glory. Enable me to act
     accordingly, and to live to Him who loved me and gave
     himself for me. Let nothing ever prevail to allure me
     from Thee, neither the hope of preferment, nor the fear
     of opposition. I have a deceitful and desperately wicked
     heart, but I trust thou wilt never leave me nor forsake me,
     seeing thou hast given me to hope in thy word.”

During the Easter Term 1804, Mr. Corrie returned to Cambridge for the
purpose of keeping his Law Exercises;[5] and on Sunday, June 10th,
of that year, was ordained Priest at Buckden, an event which he thus
notices:--

     “This day I have been admitted to the sacred Order of
     Priests. I have much, O Lord, to be grateful to Thee for!
     I was kept calm and collected during the examination;
     and, (glory be to Thy name!) I have been given to feel,
     in some measure, my insufficiency for these things. Make
     me, I beseech thee, more sensible of this, and grant that
     the solemn transactions of this day may never rise up in
     judgment against me! Let me be a light in the world,
     showing forth thy praise; and make me, both in life and
     doctrine, an example to Thy flock. Lord, excite in my heart
     strong desires after the welfare of immortal souls; and
     grant that those to whom, I trust, thou hast sent me, may
     be ‘turned from darkness to light, and from the power of
     Satan unto God.’ To thee I look: on thee I would depend.
     Blessed Jesus! be thou my righteousness and my strength.
     Fulfil all the good pleasure of thy will in me.”

In answer to a letter received from Mr. Buckworth, who, the Easter
previously, had been ordained to the curacy of Dewsbury, he writes,
August 24th, 1804:--

     “I rejoice to hear of the success of your ministerial
     efforts. O that the Lord would hasten the time when Satan’s
     kingdom shall be finally demolished, and the kingdom
     of the Messiah established on its ruins! You will now
     have another snare to contend with; the Lord having been
     pleased to own you for his servant, Satan will now seek
     to exalt you beyond measure. We tread in a narrow path:
     dangers stand thick around: a single false step may lead
     to consequences most ruinous. O what need of watchfulness!
     May the ‘Watchman of Israel’ guard you; then will you be
     secure indeed! For myself, I can but just discern the pulse
     of spiritual life to beat, and that chiefly by the struggle
     between sin and grace. Alas! I have no active exertions to
     reflect on. That I am not the willing captive of natural
     inclination is all that I can say. Since you were here, I
     have been obliged to apply for medical aid, and have found
     considerable relief (thanks be to the chief Physician!) so
     that I am now in usual health, except that I am oppressed
     with a languor which distresses me exceedingly, and
     leaves me only able to sigh and cry. How cheering the
     consideration that ‘our life is hid with Christ in God!’
     There it is secure. How animating the thought that ‘when
     Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also
     appear with him in glory!’ O the wonders of redeeming
     love, that worms, rebellious worms, may not only hope,
     but confidently expect such transcendent blessedness! For
     Christ our Head having endured the cross, to deny Him the
     rewards of His sufferings would be an injustice incapable
     of entering the Eternal mind. What shall I render [to the
     Lord] that amidst all my deadness, this hope is not taken
     from me? My help it standeth only with the Lord; and though
     I am destitute of sensible comfort, yet I am enabled to
     rest upon the unchangeable word of promise, that those
     whom He has justified, and to whom He has given the love
     of holiness, the inseparable companion of justification,
     He will infallibly glorify. With respect to the work of
     the Lord, I hope it prospers among us. I hear of good
     being done, and that is some comfort to me. Amongst your
     numerous friends, let me beg of you to remember me at the
     throne of grace: none more stands in need of your earnest
     supplications. Whilst I can keep hold of the promise, I
     am encouraged: but I assure you, it is indeed a warfare,
     a struggle, a race. You are often, _often_ present to my
     mind; and while I have any apprehension of the inestimable
     value of spiritual blessings, I will not cease to pray that
     you may be enriched with the choicest of them; and that we
     may be permitted to join in the songs of the redeemed.”


                                       “Stoke, November 12, 1804.

     “It is some time since I heard of you, but hope you are
     well: if so, the less matter whether I hear of you or not.
     However, pray snatch some passing hour to let us know how
     the work of the Lord goes on at D.; for, let matters go
     how they may with ourselves, still will we say respecting
     the success of the Gospel, ‘Good luck have thou!’ There is
     in man a desire to be _something, somewhere_; and this
     desire is, beyond a doubt, the moving spring of much of
     that forwardness we see in many touching the promotion of
     religion. Howbeit, the Gospel is furthered.

     “You will be surprised to hear of the death of James P. He
     was buried at Colsterworth about a fortnight since. With my
     father’s permission, I preached at his funeral to a crowded
     church. The effect I know not, but my own heart seemed hard
     and insensible as a rock; and, indeed, though I have proof
     that my labours are owned by my gracious Lord, yet I seem
     like Gideon’s fleece, dry in the midst of divine dew. My
     hope, however, and my confidence, is kept immoveably fixed
     on the rock of ages; and I have to bless God for a growing
     devotedness to his service, an increasing determination to
     be the world’s fool for the sake of Christ, and to count
     His reproach my highest honour.”

An entry in his private Journal, dated January 27th, 1805, manifests
the same distrust of self, and the same earnestness for the good of
his people.

     “At Skillington, this morning, I felt an earnest desire,
     had it been God’s will, that I were able to preach
     extempore. I had so strong a desire to communicate to the
     people what I felt of God’s goodness, that it seemed a
     restraint to confine myself to my paper. But, Lord, thou
     knowest what a proud creature I am. Thou seest how I covet
     the praise of man, and in mercy to my soul hast made me
     ‘slow of speech.’ O make me of quick understanding in the
     ways of godliness! At Stoke, I felt something of the same
     spirit remaining, some longings after God in prayer, and
     some breathings for his blessing on the people during
     the sermon; but at Buckminster, how changed! Wandering
     thoughts and imaginations. How manifold are the mercies,
     how infinite the patience of God! O when will it be that
     my heart shall be immoveably fixed on God: when shall my
     soul become as a weaned child? Blessed Saviour! thou art
     my Friend, my Advocate, my Head of influence: visit me
     with thy salvation: smile upon my poor, imperfect, defiled
     labours, and glorify thy name in my weakness!”

April 10th, being his 28th birth-day, is thus noticed:

     “Yesterday, I was twenty-eight years of age: but, my heart
     ever prone to forget the Lord’s mercies, I forgot to make
     any reflections on the Divine goodness in bringing me thus
     far. Lord, I would remember, to the glory of thy rich and
     free grace, that thou forgivest my transgressions, and
     coverest all mine iniquities. I have to praise thee that
     thou hidest me from the strife of tongues: thou makest my
     way very pleasant: thou strewest my path with flowers:
     thou hast also given me some tokens that I have not run
     unsent, by blessing my poor attempts to the consciences
     of my people, and awakening some of them, I trust, from
     the sleep of sin, making them to hear thy sweet voice
     speaking peace to their souls. If a worm may be permitted
     to plead with his Maker, O let my cry enter into thy ears,
     and awaken many sinners amongst us to come to Christ that
     they perish not! Yea, Lord, give me to see Jerusalem in
     prosperity: nor would I cease to plead with thee till thou
     hast answered my prayer. I would praise thy holy name for
     a growing determination to glory in nothing save in the
     cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. I would bless thee for a
     disposition to count reproach for his sake as my highest
     glory. I plainly perceive that ‘all who will live godly
     must suffer persecution.’ I cannot hope to enter into
     heaven but ‘through much tribulation,’ even as thy choicest
     servants have done. O enable me to keep my eye ever fixed
     on Jesus, that I may not be weary, or faint in my mind!
     When I look back, the brightness of thy favour makes my
     unprofitableness dark indeed; and I should have just cause
     to fear, that the avenging sword of thy justice would cut
     me down as a cumberer of the ground; but Jesus liveth,
     making intercession, and therefore I am not consumed. Nor
     shall I ever be consumed, seeing, ‘He is able to save
     to the uttermost.’ To all thy other favours, O Lord, add
     a heart to trust thy word; and henceforth let the love
     of Christ constrain me to a more constant and uniform
     obedience. Thou knowest that I love thy law; and though I
     come far short of its requirements, yet there is not one
     jot or tittle that I desire to have altered. I consent to
     it that it is ‘holy, just, and good,’ and desire to conform
     my whole spirit, soul and body, to its divine precepts. Let
     thy Holy Spirit, then, carry on the work thou hast begun!
     Write thy law upon my heart; put it into my mind; and let
     me be changed from glory to glory, till I become ‘meet for
     the inheritance of the saints in light:’ whither, in thine
     own good time and way, bring me of thine infinite mercy,
     for Christ’s sake. Amen.”

In the Easter term of 1805, Mr. Corrie was admitted to his L.L.B.
degree. It was during this visit to Cambridge that the subject of a
chaplaincy to the East India Company was strongly urged upon him by
the late Mr. Simeon. After much and serious consideration, it seemed
to Mr. C. to be his duty to devote himself to the spread of the
Gospel amongst the heathen. An appointment to India was accordingly
obtained for him, through the influence of the late Mr. William
Hoare; and the following extracts from Mr. C.’s journal and letters
will exhibit the state of his mind, in the prospect of quitting his
curacy, for the purpose of exercising his ministry in a distant land.

     “July 25th, 1805. I have for a long time neglected to note
     down the workings of my soul; but I would now remark, that
     when I have been in my best frames, my mind has been most
     resigned to the work of the Lord in India. Yet I feel much
     cleaving to creatures, and a want of resignation. Lord,
     teach me to know, and do thy will!

     “Oct. 6th. As the time approaches for leaving England, more
     anxiety of mind arises; though blessed be God, no desire
     to draw back from the work. O may I be found but faithful!
     Lord, strengthen and support me in the work. ‘Give what
     thou commandest,--and then command what thou wilt:’ let thy
     will be done _in_ me, and _by_ me; and in life and death
     let me be thine, through Jesus Christ, thy dear Son, and my
     beloved Saviour. Amen!”


                      TO THE REV. J. BUCKWORTH.

                                              “November 12, 1805.

     “From my last you would, perhaps, expect to hear from me
     before this; which might have been the case, but that
     I received information, when in London, that the fleet
     does not sail for India before January next. It is not
     likely, therefore, that I shall leave this place [Stoke]
     before that time; unless, indeed, Mr. D. should meet with
     a curate to supply my place. He is now in London; and, as
     my engagement with him ceases at Martinmas, should he meet
     with any person at liberty to enter on the curacy, I cannot
     expect, nor do I desire, to continue longer. He returns
     this week, when it will be determined. On my way from
     London, I stopped at Cambridge, and read prayers for Mr.
     Simeon on the Thursday evening. It was highly gratifying
     to see very many gownsmen attentive hearers of God’s word.
     One might compare it to so many messengers waiting for
     instructions, with which they were about to post off in
     all directions. The Lord increase their number, and long
     continue Mr. Simeon at Cambridge, an invaluable blessing
     to the church and nation!--I feel some degree of regret
     at leaving [this place]; and, especially on account of
     some who manifest an attachment to the cause [of God],
     whilst yet they are far from being what I could wish them.
     I experience something of what the Apostle expressed
     towards his people, when he declared he ‘travailed in
     birth of them till Christ were formed in them.’ O that the
     Lord would ‘cut short his work in righteousness,’ that I
     might leave them with a prospect of rendering an account
     of them with joy! I reflect with much dissatisfaction on
     my conduct whilst among them: so little of the example of
     Christ, so little of warmth in public, so little of zeal
     in private, so much ignorance, and inexperience in stating
     the truths of God, that I fear lest their blood should be
     required at my hands: almost involuntarily my soul cries
     out, ‘Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O Lord, and my
     mouth shall sing aloud of thy righteousness!’ O the horrid
     wickedness of soul-murder! How infinitely valuable must
     that blood be, that can wash out so foul a stain! O may
     I ever experience its healing and cleansing power; and
     may the consideration of the richness and the fulness of
     redeeming love animate me to greater exertions, and fill
     my mouth with more exalted praises! Lord Jesus, let thy
     power rest upon me, and thy strength be perfected in my
     weakness! Out of the mouth of a babe and suckling in Divine
     knowledge, ordain praise and glory to Thyself! Let my dear
     friend say, ‘Amen,’ to these unconnected petitions; whilst,
     through grace, my prayers shall continue to ascend, that
     every needful gift and grace may be bestowed upon you,
     that you may be enriched with all spiritual knowledge and
     understanding; and that you may have utterance given ‘to
     declare the whole counsel of God.’”


                                             “January 13th, 1806.

     “I have not heard further respecting the time of sailing
     for India, but am getting ready for a removal on the
     shortest notice. With much thankfulness I inform you,
     that my mind is quite tranquil in the prospect of
     leaving everything dear to human nature. I have, indeed,
     sometimes, painful convictions of my insufficiency for the
     great work before me; but am in general enabled to believe,
     that ‘as my day is, so shall my strength be.’ The affection
     my people express for me fills me with shame, that I do not
     more deserve it, and with fear lest I should be tempted to
     think of myself more highly than I ought to think. It has
     pleased my gracious Lord, however, to give me of late a
     deep experience of my own depravity, and of my unworthiness
     of the least of his mercies. My dear friends seem entirely
     reconciled to a separation. I trust that we shall be able
     to part without the sorrow of those ‘who have no hope.’ O
     how great the condescension of our Redeemer God, who stoops
     to so close an union with sinful worms: who allows the sons
     and daughters of corruption to address Him as their Husband
     and their head; and salutes them as His spouse and His
     beloved! Methinks such honour, so undeserved, might well
     engage our every thought, and make our every inquiry only,
     ‘What shall I render, &c.?’”


        [1] A friend who had expressed an intention of providing
            in life for Mr. C.

        [2] The church of which the late Rev. Charles Simeon was
            then Incumbent.

        [3] The late Rev. John Buckworth, Vicar of Dewsbury,
            whose father was an inhabitant of Colsterworth.

        [4] Montague Cholmeley, Esq. of Easton Hall, near
            Grantham, one of Mr. Corrie’s parishioners,
            and grandfather of the present Sir Montague J.
            Cholmeley, Bart.

        [5] It was now that Mr. Corrie became more intimately
            acquainted with Henry Martyn than he had before been.




                             CHAPTER II.

          DEPARTURE FOR INDIA--VOYAGE--ARRIVAL AT CALCUTTA.


Early in the year 1806, Mr. Corrie took leave of his relatives and
parishioners to embark for India. At that time, a voyage to India
was looked upon as a much greater undertaking than it is considered
at the present day. Accordingly on Mr. Corrie’s departure from his
father’s house, the parishioners pressed round to take their leave of
him; many of them deeply affected, believing “that they should see
his face no more.”

After a prosperous journey to London and Portsmouth, he embarked
(March 30, 1806) on board the _Asia_ East Indiaman, bound to
Calcutta. Mr. C. was accompanied by a brother-Chaplain, the Rev.
Joseph Parson, one of his most attached College friends. Among the
passengers were many cadets, to several of whom Mr. C. was made
useful, and became in after life their friend and counsellor. Some
particulars of the voyage are subjoined from Mr. Corrie’s Journal and
Letters, which shew the lively interest he took in the welfare of all
around him, and indicate the steady purpose with which he kept in
view the great work before him.

In his journal, Mr. C. writes under date of

     “April 10th. This day I have completed my twenty-ninth
     year. In the review of the past year, O what reason have
     I to adore the divine mercy. Soon after I had determined
     on going to India, which was in June last, it pleased God
     to work by his word, and to raise a general attention to
     eternal things, amongst my people at Buckminster and Stoke,
     giving me real favour in their sight, for which I desire to
     praise Him, confessing that I am not worthy to be ranked
     amongst the meanest of His ministers. Some amongst them,
     I hope, were brought to God. O that they may continue
     to walk in the truth; and may each amongst them become
     Christians, not in name only, but in deed and in truth!
     Since I have been on the point of departing from England,
     every objection to the undertaking has been removed from
     my mind. My heart is set on the work of the Lord in India;
     and I would not draw back, as far as I know myself, to
     be made Archbishop of Canterbury. I have taken leave of
     my dear friends, most likely for ever in this world. I
     would dedicate every faculty of my soul and body to my
     redeeming God. Lord, accept me, working in me that which
     is well-pleasing in thy sight, through Jesus Christ my
     Lord and Saviour; to whom with Thy blessed self, and Holy
     Spirit, Three persons in one Jehovah, be all glory, and
     honour, and praise, now and for evermore. Amen!

     “April 14th. On Saturday afternoon, and yesterday morning,
     the wind blew quite a hurricane. In the night of Saturday,
     I could not sleep for the tossing of the ship: I lay
     meditating on death, and found my mind calm and resigned;
     but saw nothing in whatever I had done on which I could
     rely for a moment; saw nothing, in fact, but what was
     deficient and defiled with sin. Yet, in the consideration
     of the atonement, and intercession of Jesus, I could look
     _without dismay_, though not with any sensible joy, to a
     judgment-seat.

     “Yesterday the wind was too high to admit of divine
     service. Much consideration about our danger during the
     preceding night; but, alas, little disposition to praise
     the Lord for his goodness! Some few of the passengers
     listened with attention, whilst I read a sermon on the
     poop. I had much conversation at intervals with several of
     them, on the subject of religion; and found some disposed
     to attend. Yesterday, passed one of the Salvage islands:
     to-day one of the Canaries (Palma.) No one who has not been
     for some time out of sight of land can conceive the delight
     which the view of these created; or the refreshment they
     afforded the eye. As stupendous monuments of the divine
     power, they ought to have raised more adoration in my heart
     to the great Supreme. But, alas! I find the more I get
     familiarized to the wonders with which I am surrounded, the
     less sensibly I feel my dependence on Him in whom I live
     and move. Blessed Saviour, O let me be accepted, and ever
     preserved through thy intercession, and kept by thy power
     through faith unto salvation. Amen.”

Whilst off the coast of Africa, Mr. Corrie relates that the Lady
Burgess, one of the Indiamen in company with the Asia, struck upon a
rock:

     “The masts were cut away: the pinnace, contrary to
     expectation, floated, (for she filled with water,) and
     soon after was driven clear of the breakers, with about
     forty persons. As many as could swim plunged in, and about
     seventy at length got into her. The boat also was manned,
     and, by the exertions of the chief mate, the ladies, (six
     in number,) were put into her, and none allowed to go
     with them, lest, being crowded by too many, she should be
     swamped. The captain and some others who could not swim,
     were saved by laying themselves on planks; and, being
     drifted by the waves, were afterwards picked up by the
     boats. The Leopard’s boats saved about twenty-five. The
     ladies were received on board the Nelson; the greater part
     [of the crew] were taken up by the Melville, and some by
     the Sovereign and Alexander. About fifty perished; amongst
     whom were the first and sixth mates, the purser, and
     twenty-four cadets; the greater part of the others were
     Asiatics, with some soldiers.”

With reference to this melancholy occurrence, Mr. C. writes:

     “Sunday, April 20. This morning has been spent in great
     anxiety. About two o’clock, I heard guns firing as signals
     of distress. When day broke, the wreck of a vessel was
     seen on the rocks, off the island Benevento. About eight
     boats were observed at a distance, and at ten o’clock
     we perceived one making towards the Asia. Soon after,
     a passenger of the Nelson, and one of the mates of the
     Lady Burgess, came on board, from whom we learnt that the
     unfortunate ship was the Lady Burgess, which was gone down
     with every part of the cargo. Six ladies, passengers,
     reached the Nelson in safety. The mate, after putting the
     ladies on board the Nelson, returned to the wreck, when
     her poop remained above water sufficiently to preserve
     life: on returning a second time, nothing was seen but part
     of the bowsprit, every creature had disappeared; but the
     Commodore, having sent several boats to their assistance,
     suggests a hope that all are saved. What reason have we of
     this ship to adore a kind Providence for being directed
     a different course! Alas, that such indifference, nay
     base rebellion [against God] should still appear! O let
     me not be as those who know not God, but grant me such a
     due sense of all thy mercies, O Lord, that my heart may be
     unfeignedly thankful, and that I may show forth thy praise
     not only with my lips, but in my life! Amen.”

The Journal proceeds:

     “April 23rd, St. Iago.--Went on shore with the purser. On
     landing was struck by the scenery, which was quite new
     to me, and highly picturesque. Within the beach there
     is a low valley, having the appearance of a marsh, with
     shrubs growing in the shape of a pine-apple; it had a very
     pleasing effect. Water was here procured for the fleet.
     The town stands on a hill, on the right of the valley; and
     within the fortifications. At the foot of the ascent, and
     on the beach, were three officers riding on small lean
     ponies. Their clothes, ragged and much worn, were such a
     contrast to an Englishman’s idea of the word ‘officer,’
     as to excite a smile. Further on were some slaves, in a
     state of nature, employed in breaking cocoa-nuts. At the
     entrance of the garrison stood a sentinel, without shoes or
     stockings, his other clothes hanging in rags, and having no
     lock to his musket; altogether, he reminded me of one of
     Sancho Panza’s guards. In the town, which consisted of two
     rows of huts, we found poultry, pine-apples, cocoa-nuts,
     &c. &c. for sale. The natives perfectly understood what are
     called ‘the tricks of trade.’ I am told they sell a kind of
     Port wine of inferior quality, mixed with rum to keep it
     from going sour; they have also a kind of gin, extracted
     from the sugar-cane. Their women are the most disgusting
     figures that can be conceived; many of them having only a
     covering round the waist; the men too like men in general;
     but one, a Caffre slave, was about seven feet high. The
     country presents a most barren appearance, being very
     hilly, and seldom visited with rain. After staying about
     three hours, I returned to the Asia, most thankful that my
     lot had been cast in Britain, and admiring the kindness of
     providence to that happy isle. Long may a gracious God
     exercise the same fatherly care over it! Long may England
     flourish, as the place which God hath chosen to put his
     name there!

     “Sunday, April 27th. I had service on deck to-day, the
     sailors being very attentive; was much affected with
     languor, so that the day has passed in an unprofitable
     manner. I had a long conversation with G., and hope well of
     him again. Thought much of my dear relations; and had an
     affecting sense of the value of former privileges, ‘when
     I went to the house of God, with the voice of joy and
     gladness.’ O for the happy time when I shall be privileged
     to draw near to God without restraint! Blessed be His name
     for some sweet seasons in private. O may the impression of
     them remain, and be productive of holiness in heart and
     life!

     “May 3rd. Yesterday the wind sprung up, a light breeze, and
     continues to drive us two knots an hour, after a calm of
     three days. In the night, we had a very narrow escape from
     running foul of the Alexander; the boats were about to be
     lowered from the idea that the ship might go down by the
     concussion. What reason to be thankful for preservation! O
     for a due sense of all thy mercies, my God and Saviour!

     “Friday, May 11th. This day had divine service on deck: in
     the evening had a conversation with V. on the doctrine of
     the Atonement. He seemed much impressed, and said he had
     never before considered it; but hoped he should now make it
     the study of his life. Lord, work in him both to will and
     to do for Jesus Christ’s sake! Amen. I would record, to my
     shame, how feeble my efforts are for the eternal welfare of
     those around me; and, when I think of the shame I feel, I
     desire to be roused to greater exertions, lest Jesus Christ
     should profess himself ashamed of me at the last day. O the
     piercing thought of being excluded from thy blessed vision!
     Prevent it by thy grace! let me not fall, I pray.

     “May 18th. Service on deck. Found much sweetness in
     private devotion, with a disposition to pray for my dear
     relatives and friends by name. My mind tolerably fixed on
     divine things, with boldness to speak to any that came
     in my way, on the subject of religion. I have of late
     observed with pleasure a great change in P.’s views and
     sentiments respecting scriptural truths; and a practice
     more correspondent thereto than formerly. This morning, he
     spoke with much feeling, on several experimental truths
     of Christianity; and I humbly hope, is no stranger to the
     power of them. O that I may be enabled to walk in wisdom
     towards him, and that he may be an honoured instrument in
     turning many to righteousness!

     “Sunday, June 1st. I have neglected to make memoranda
     during the past week, and fear it is a symptom of spiritual
     decay: yet, I find, in general, much fixedness of mind in
     private prayer; and sometimes much tenderness of spirit.
     The Bible is my delight and daily counsellor; and I think
     I watch every opportunity of calling the attention of
     those around me to the things of eternity. Yet, I would
     confess to my shame, that these attempts are feeble,
     generally very unskilfully conducted, and little calculated
     to produce a good effect, and chiefly confined to more
     intimate associates. I plainly perceive that without a
     great exercise of divine power, I am totally unfit for
     the work of introducing the Gospel amongst the heathen;
     and much fear lest the objects of time and sense should
     divert me from that pursuit. Yet, Lord, thou knowest that
     to be instrumental in turning many unto righteousness is my
     highest ambition. This is the determination of my judgment;
     though, alas! my affections draw me powerfully to court
     the favour of man, and to covet ease. I perceive myself
     poor and blind, and miserable, and wretched, and lost, and
     undone; but O the joyful sound of wisdom, righteousness,
     sanctification, and redemption in Christ Jesus for ruined
     sinners! Blessed Lord, grant me a spirit of faith, that I
     may apprehend this dear Redeemer; and by virtue of union
     with Him may obtain acquittal from all condemnation, and
     daily become more like Him, in righteousness and true
     holiness!”

To the Rev. J. Buckworth he wrote as follows:--

     “We are in hopes of reaching Madras in nine weeks from this
     time; so that before you receive this, which comes by way
     of St. Helena, I shall, by the divine permission, be in
     India. Indeed, on this element, in a peculiar manner is
     the apostle’s limitation to be attended to, ‘If the Lord
     will, we shall do this or that.’ My dear friend will be
     ready to fear that an account of our spiritual voyage is
     to be excluded from this paper. Would that I could gladden
     your heart with tidings of a large fleet steering for the
     haven of everlasting blessedness; but on this subject my
     materials are scanty, though, blessed be God, some news of
     this kind I can send you.... We have twenty-two youths on
     board, going as cadets to India: of these a few allow me
     to talk freely and familiarly on the best subjects; the
     others treat me with civility, though sometimes they are
     shy of my company. One I sincerely hope is pious, though
     very volatile in his disposition: another attaches himself
     very much to me, and is much separated from his companions.
     These are the most promising among us, ‘the gleaning
     grapes, one or two, on the top of the uppermost boughs.’ I
     have distributed several Testaments, and other books; but
     observe no increase at present....

     “My thoughts lead me now to Dewsbury, where I fancy I
     behold my dear friend and his dear partner, happy in each
     other, and happy in the love of Jesus; but not without
     some thorn, to remind them that their God has a more
     complete happiness in store for them. You will not need
     assurances that my daily prayers ascend on your behalf; nor
     need I ask you to believe that words cannot express the
     interest I feel in your welfare. May the richest blessings
     of Providence and of grace descend upon you both; and
     may you bring much honour to the ways of truth, by your
     lives and conversation, till, full of days, and full of
     grace, like shocks of corn in harvest, you be gathered
     into the heavenly garner! I long to be publishing glad
     tidings of salvation to poor Indians, and am daily studying
     their language for this purpose: an Asiatic on board
     helps me in acquiring the pronunciation, and in return,
     receives instruction in the New Testament: he evidences a
     teachable disposition; laments the folly and idolatry of
     his countrymen, and I trust will one day become a witness
     against their abominations.”

But to return to the Journal:--

     “June 8th, 1806. On a review of this week, I feel
     much cause for humiliation, and much for praise; for
     humiliation, that I gather no more boldness in the
     cause of God and of his Son. Yet, I am thankful that my
     silent refusal to conform to the vanities around me is
     not unobserved; and that a sneer about saintship is not
     unfrequently indulged in, when I am present. I rejoice in
     these tokens of my separation from the temper and practices
     of the world; yet I would look to more certain evidence of
     my love to Jesus than this, even in the devotedness of my
     heart to His service and glory; and in the love I feel for
     perishing souls around me. Alas, my evidences are very few:
     yet I think I would rather be a door-keeper in the house of
     God where I might see His face, than live in the richest
     palace on earth; and to be instrumental in turning sinners
     ‘from the power of Satan unto God,’ is more desired by me
     than to be Emperor of the world. These are my sentiments
     and desires: O Lord, let them not evaporate in empty
     speculations for Jesus Christ’s sake!

     “Thursday night. I would record to the honour of Divine
     grace, the goodness of God to my soul. Rose this morning at
     half-past five, found much earnestness in prayer, and my
     mind much disposed to that duty, but little if any sensible
     comfort. Prayed particularly for a believing, waiting
     spirit, which has been graciously vouchsafed. I have
     observed two or three instances of answers to prayer, in
     the waiting frame of my mind; in the attention I have been
     able to give to study, and in some other particulars. Lord,
     keep me humble and thankful for Jesus Christ’s sake, Amen!

     “June 29th. I have neglected to make memoranda of my
     state. Abstained from dinner, with a view to afflict
     my soul before God, on account of my own sins, and the
     sins of those around me. O Lord, without thy divine
     influence I fast and pray in vain. The sins in myself I
     would particularly note are, a backwardness to think on
     divine subjects; a general deadness in religious duties;
     a coldness of affection towards the Lord Jesus Christ; a
     want of zeal for God, and of love for souls; and a fear
     of censure and reproach, which leads me to suffer sin on
     my neighbour unreproved. With respect to those around
     me, their profane swearing, their neglect of God and His
     worship. O will not God be avenged on such a people as
     this? Will not this floating city be sunk in the mighty
     waters, for the wickedness of its inhabitants? O Lord, let
     my cry come before Thee, in behalf of this ship’s company,
     through the mediation of Jesus Christ!

     “Sunday, July 6th. This morning a most tremendous gale came
     on. Went on deck at five o’clock. The vessel rolling so as
     once to ship a sea on the lee-side; every person seemed
     apprehensive of danger. For my own part, I do not recollect
     to have been afraid, but I felt much awe and seriousness,
     in the thought of appearing before God. In the afternoon
     (two o’clock), a man fell overboard from the foremost
     main-yard. By the uncommon exertions of Mr. Walker, the
     third mate, and four of the men, he was taken up alive, and
     gives hopes of recovery. Mr. W.’s conduct on this occasion
     merits the greatest praise, and has much endeared him to
     every one on board.

     “July 20th. Read Church History and Persian. The Commodore
     spoke an American, which left Calcutta on May 28, and
     which on June 22nd, spoke a ship at sea, and received
     information that a frigate, supposed to be detached by
     Jerome Buonaparte,[6] put into the Cape and was captured
     by Admiral Popham; from whence it is concluded that Jerome
     Buonaparte either followed the frigate into the Cape and
     was taken, or proceeded to India. Two country ships had
     been captured in the straits of Malacca.

     “Thursday, July 24th. In addition to the news heard on
     Tuesday, learned from the Commodore, that the American told
     him a general peace had been brought about in India. O that
     ‘the Prince of Peace’ would establish His dominion among
     those perishing heathens! Every day brings me acquainted
     with some new proof of that wretched slavery which they are
     under to the powers of darkness. My mind is bent on the
     work of the ministry amongst them. I think with delight
     on the time when I shall be able to address them, in
     their own language, on the glorious truths of the gospel;
     and am thankful that I find diligence and ardour in the
     acquirement of Hindoostanee. Yet, when I reflect on the
     backwardness and timidity that possesses my mind in this
     matter, among my present associates, I am ready to fear
     lest I should be diverted from my purpose. Lord, hold me
     up, and bring me through, more than conqueror, for His sake
     who, I believe and feel, ‘loved _me_, and gave himself _for
     me_!’

     “Thursday, August 21st. This morning heard that Ceylon
     was in sight; went on deck soon after, and saw land, but
     very indistinctly. At half-past one the shore presented
     a beautiful object; a great variety of trees, hills, and
     plains. My mind more affected than I can express, with
     a sense of the goodness of God, in bringing me thus far
     in health and safety. I feel no inconvenience from the
     climate, and very little of that listlessness I so much
     feared. O for a heart to praise the Lord! Surely, surely,
     I am more ungrateful than any of God’s children; for His
     child I feel I am! O write thy law on my heart; and let my
     obedient life bring glory to Thee, through Jesus Christ!
     O how I long to be declaring the way of salvation to
     perishing souls! O let me have that faith which overcomes
     the world; set me free from every entanglement; keep
     through thy word those on board whom thou hast disposed to
     consideration; fortify their minds, and keep them from the
     tempter’s power, to the glory of thy grace, Amen, Amen!

     “Sunday, August 24th. Rose this morning at five o’clock.
     After prayer--in which I found earnestness, and tolerable
     fixedness of mind, though no stirring of affection--went on
     deck. Read in the epistle to the Hebrews, and found much
     light flash on my mind in reading. Saw more clearly than
     ever the _distinction_, yet _consistency_, between the old
     and new covenant. At eleven, read a sermon from Walker;
     afterwards joined in prayer with W, P, G, and V.[7] I found
     much enlargement of heart, and much freedom of expression
     in prayer. Lord, keep me humble; and, O bless these my
     associates! Convince them of sin; lead them to Jesus;
     make them strong in the Lord; and be a spirit of adoption
     in their hearts, for Jesus Christ’s sake! Lord, bless my
     dear relatives. O give them grace to walk before thee
     with perfect hearts; and supply them with every needful
     earthly blessing. Feed them ‘with food convenient’ for
     their station, and finally crown grace with glory. Amen! No
     prayers on deck, or in the cuddy.

     “Monday. Yesterday afternoon, a strange sail came in sight
     to the northward. Cleared for action, and lay at quarters
     all night. Expect to reach Madras to-morrow morning by six
     o’clock. Every one seems unsettled in prospect of going
     ashore; my own mind has caught the contagion. Nothing to
     advantage has been done to-day. ‘Lord, save or I perish.’

     “Wednesday. Were disappointed in our expectation, by a
     strong current which set us so far to the westward that we
     were obliged to tack, and wait for the sea-breeze, which to
     our great joy sprang up about three o’clock; and brought
     us into Madras roads, where we cast anchor exactly at ten
     at night. Yesterday morning the air was much impregnated
     with the flavour of the productions of Asia, having a smell
     like the sickly smell arising from sweetmeats. The entrance
     into the roads was very delightful: the light-house before
     us, the European residents’ houses on the left, showing
     lights from various quarters; the Nabob of Arcot’s palace
     lighted so as to appear brilliantly illuminated. All these
     were pleasing objects to eyes accustomed to look only upon
     the wide extended ocean for four months past. The striking
     of clocks, too, was most gratifying to the ear. My mind
     was much affected with a sense of the Divine goodness,
     in bringing us thus far in safety and peace. As soon as
     we were anchored, two boats came from Admiral Trowbridge
     for despatches; and a _Catamaran_,[8] with three natives
     charged with letters from the Town-major to the Commanding
     Officer. These natives presented a most disgusting
     appearance to a stranger, especially an European stranger.
     They have no covering, save a small piece of cotton round
     their waists; and a cap, like a fool’s cap, of fine
     basketwork, in which they carry their letters: and, being
     entire strangers to our language, my mind was affected with
     dismay and horror. Retiring to my cabin, despondency almost
     overcame me. My native country, with its healthy climate,
     and hospitable inhabitants, came forcibly to my mind. Those
     loved objects seemed for ever gone: dear relatives for
     ever fled! In exchange, a sickly climate, a burning soil,
     a heathen population, were to be my associates. Alas! how
     these considerations depress my spirits, while a sense
     of my own unfitness to encounter any of these obstacles,
     leads me to consider this as a place of banishment, and an
     untimely burial-ground! Yet have I not freely chosen this
     undertaking? And, has not God power to bring me through?
     And, is He not sovereign of Asia, as well as of Europe?
     And, is He not ready to save here, as there? O my foolish,
     unbelieving heart! I see the truth of these suggestions;
     yet unbelief prevents me from taking the comfort of them. O
     Lord, work faith in my heart; and enable me to glorify thee
     by a firm reliance on thy promise, that thou wilt not leave
     me, but wilt make me ‘more than conqueror through Him that
     loved me,’ even Jesus thy Son: to whom with Thee and the
     Holy Ghost be glory for ever!

     “This morning several boats filled with natives came off:
     the rowers, like the Catamaran Jacks in appearance and
     dress: the masters or duboshes,[9] having white muslin
     coats and petticoats. These duboshes are very obsequious,
     very pressing of their services; and have written
     characters, as from former masters; but many of these are
     evidently forgeries. Many of our Bengal passengers are
     gone on shore. I felt too depressed to go; and too much
     interested in V. and Y. to leave them on board. Y. I hope,
     seems in some measure, established in sound principles and
     practice. V. alas, discovers a backwardness to converse on
     religious subjects; and I fear, shuns me, lest I should
     trouble him with them: he is, however, very regular in his
     conduct; and much respected by his associates. But, Oh!
     what avails a mere name to live?--He is now gone on shore.
     Y. remains on board, with the other Madras cadets, until an
     order for their disembarkation arrives. O Lord, keep them
     by thy power! O let not Satan triumph over them, for Jesus
     Christ’s sake. Amen.

     “MADRAS, Wednesday evening, Aug. 27th, 1806. Went on shore,
     and was much annoyed by the clamorous importunity of the
     natives, who were waiting in hundreds on the beach to carry
     the luggage, or otherwise serve the new comers: their
     harsh language, and their almost naked bodies, their eager
     and obtrusive offers of service disgusted and wearied me
     exceedingly. With some difficulty, I got through the crowd;
     and, on arriving at the New Navy Tavern, found some of my
     old shipmates. Here we were again importuned by duboshes
     who were eager to serve us. We made choice of one who
     proved a notorious cheat: he made off with six rupees given
     him to hire a _bandy_;[10] and I know not yet how much
     linen he may have stolen. The profusion of silver or gold
     rings which the natives wear on their arms, their ancles,
     their ears, and their toes, appeared odd to me; their
     offers of service and their whole conduct, whilst I was on
     shore, have impressed my mind with an opinion of their deep
     depravity, and their entire want of principle....

     “On Thursday, August 28th. Parson and I went to call on
     the London Society’s missionary. Though unknown to him,
     and though carrying no letter of introduction, yet I was
     certain that if he were a real missionary, we should be
     welcome; and I was not disappointed in this expectation.
     We received a cordial reception: Martyn having mentioned
     my name, we soon became cordial. He appears a humble pious
     man, not destitute of ability, with a degree of zeal: his
     education appears to have been confined. Here we learned
     that Dr. Ker, the Senior Chaplain, had a letter for me from
     Martyn; and that, being obliged to go to Seringapatam for
     the recovery of his health, he had left it at the house
     of Mr. Torriano. Thither Mr. L. drove me in his bandy,
     leaving Mr. Parson to walk back to the inn. On arriving
     at Mr. T.’s, I found the letter, enclosed in one from
     Dr. Ker, recommending me to accept Mr. T.’s invitation to
     take up our abode with him; which we did, and experienced
     much hospitality and kindness. Mr. T. is a self-taught
     Christian indeed: his son is a sensible and very pious
     youth, and showed us much brotherly love; and from the
     Lieutenant we received great regard. Next day Mr. P. and
     myself called on Mr. V. and found him very reserved: he
     afterwards, on further intercourse, became more sociable;
     and engaged me to preach for him on Sunday the 31st; which
     I did, and took for a subject the character of Josiah. The
     Governor, &c., were present; and the church was pretty
     full: the congregation was very attentive; though some, I
     hear scoffed; but others expressed their approbation. In
     the evening P. officiated at the chapel, Black Town, and
     expounded the first chapter of the Epistle to the Romans.
     I went to hear Mr. L. who preached from Psalm xxxvii. 40.
     During our stay on shore, I went often to the cadets’
     tents, and have reason to be thankful. Found V. and Y. kept
     free from the vices of the place.

     “Friday evening, Sept. 5th. I read a portion of the church
     prayers, and addressed an exhortation to the boys at
     the Asylum. There are about two hundred half-caste boys
     educated there, and maintained by public subscription.
     Dr. Ker is Superintendent; and Mr. L. is acting Master.
     During our stay at Mr. Torriano’s, our apartment was a tent
     comfortably fitted up, where Mr. T. generally (his son V.
     always), comes morning and evening to join in worship. The
     fort is a most complete structure, seemingly defying the
     power of man to take it: the buildings within it are very
     sumptuous. The Black Town far exceeds my expectation, in
     the commodiousness of its houses, and in their structure;
     but the streets are narrow; and the dust and filth in
     them render the town exceedingly unwholesome. I do not
     find the heat by any means so oppressive as I expected:
     morning and evening it is as cool as summer in England.
     I frequently walked several miles. The Europeans are,
     in general, very averse to the idea of evangelizing the
     natives. The chaplains consider it as a hopeless case; and
     others look upon it as needless and impolitic. I lament
     that my mind was not more affected with the stupid idolatry
     of these depraved people. Their pagodas abound; and their
     attention to them might shame people of purer principles;
     whilst their depraved morals show that their religion is
     confined wholly to externals; and that they are incapable
     of communion with a holy God. These considerations ought
     to impress me more. O the unconquerable hardness of this
     stupid heart! Yet, blessed be God, who has reconciled
     my mind more to the work of the ministry here; and has
     influenced me to prefer the honour which cometh of God,
     more than the favour of men. I think I am more determined
     than ever on publishing salvation to these ignorant
     heathen. I have to lament that my mind seldom experienced
     any sensible comfort in God, whilst on shore: deadness and
     oppression overspread my soul for the most part; yet, I do
     not recollect, except on one occasion, that I attempted
     to shun the reproach of the cross; and, in general I was
     enable to introduce serious subjects.

     “Sunday, Sept. 7th. Came on board the Alexander, in
     consequence of the Asia being ordered round by Penang, to
     take troops to Bengal: much heaviness of mind on account of
     the state of those around me....

     “Saturday, Sept. 13th. On Tuesday evening last, we came
     to anchor off Masulipatam. During that day, in making
     in to the shore, the ship was found in three and a half
     fathoms (she draws three fathoms;) consequently great
     alarm prevailed, every one expecting that she would strike
     instantly. The wind being brisk, the ship answered the
     helm; and, by the Divine favour, we got clear of the
     danger. In the afternoon, a ship which had been in sight
     for some days, hauled her wind and stood our course: this
     raised a suspicion of her being an enemy; the drum beat to
     quarters and every preparation was made to prevent her
     boarding us. After some time, she hoisted Danish colours,
     and came to anchor near us off Masulipatam. During these
     two times of alarm, I recollect to have been much more
     anxious as to the event, than on former times of danger
     during the voyage; and have reason to fear I have suffered
     damage, especially since we left Madras. This I know has
     been the case, and I bless God who has given me to feel it,
     and to lament it, and to strive and pray against it; and
     (blessed be His name) not in vain.

     “On Wednesday, Parson and myself went off together with two
     officers of the king’s regiment: after a most unpleasant
     passage of twenty-four hours, we arrived at Masulipatam, a
     distance of not more than six miles in a straight line. Our
     delay was owing to the land wind, which, blowing directly
     opposite, drove us far to leeward, and obliged the men to
     push the boat along shore with long poles; a tedious and
     laborious operation. On entering the fort, we found that
     Colonel Norris (to whom we had a letter of introduction
     from his father-in law, Mr. Torriano,) was in the fort. We
     went to his house, and on being introduced to his lady,
     presented our letter, which she opened, and sent to the
     Colonel, who was on a committee at the barracks. Breakfast
     was got for us immediately, and every attention shown
     us; after breakfast, the Colonel came in, and ordered us
     change of clothes; after we had dressed, he came and shook
     us very kindly by the hand, and said, he had an order in
     his pocket, which obliged him to be particularly kind to
     us. This order he punctually obeyed, shewing us every mark
     of attention possible, and even regard.... The propriety
     of conduct necessary in ministers, the characters of
     many eminently pious missionaries, and of Christ and His
     Apostles, were the principal subjects of conversation. May
     God give a blessing to our poor attempts to spread the
     savour of Jesus’ name; and may the Colonel’s kindnesses to
     us be abundantly repaid out of the fulness of Christ! After
     passing twenty-four hours very agreeably, and I trust not
     unprofitably, we left Masulipatam yesterday about three
     o’clock, with the purser; and though detained a short time
     at the entrance of the river, from want of water, we got
     on board the Alexander by five o’clock: the anchor was
     weighed, and we set sail as soon as possible.

     “Tuesday. Yesterday I was very unwell in consequence of
     drinking too much water: the day passed in a restless,
     unprofitable manner to myself. In the evening, I was
     enabled to speak to the surgeon on the utility of prayer;
     which I did because of some sarcastic remarks made, as
     to the uselessness of the Bible and Prayer-book in time
     of action; we being suspicious that there was an enemy’s
     ship in view. He was silenced, and afterwards showed me
     more than usual attention. We were looking out all the
     afternoon of yesterday for a pilot; and came to anchor
     at ten in the evening in Saugor roads, amidst a fleet
     of Indiamen homeward-bound--two ships of war, with many
     country ships--a most gratifying sight; though, I confess,
     I felt little pleasure. The remembrance of dear relatives
     filled me with deep regret, whilst the prospect of being
     instrumental in furthering the Lord’s work in India filled
     me with joy; and I felt I could forsake all for Christ’s
     sake.

     “Thursday. We came to anchor in Diamond harbour. The
     sailing up the river was delightful; the green herbage
     and foliage most refreshing to the eye; and the numerous
     population raised wonder how provision could be found for
     so many persons. The whole shore, as far as the eye could
     reach, appeared one continued village on each side. The
     sight of a burying-ground for Europeans at Diamond harbour,
     with several monuments erected therein, tended to lessen
     my joy; as did the death of Captain ---- of the 77th, for
     whom the colours were hoisted half-mast high, and who was
     buried in the sea the evening we lay at anchor, in Saugor
     roads. Captain C----, Ensign W., Parson, and myself, left
     the Alexander in a budgerow,[11] about nine o’clock, and
     sailed from Diamond harbour about half past ten in the
     evening.

     “Friday, Sept. 19th. I went on shore in the morning at
     Fulta, and sending some provisions on board to my chums,
     remained till flood-tide, which was not till two o’clock.
     My mind was much gratified with the scene; the green fields
     appearing here and there between the groves, were very
     much like scenes I remembered in England; many birds were
     singing much like the nightingale; herds of cattle, of the
     buffalo breed, with herdsmen tending them here and there on
     the bank. A dead body floating on the river created much
     horror in my mind; and the bird called the adjutant excited
     much surprise. At Fulta I found a very elegant inn, and
     accommodations very reasonable. Having placed a chair at
     the gate-way on the elevated situation on the bank of the
     river, the opposite bank appeared covered with villages,
     and the surface of the river with boats. I took out my
     bible, and read the 60th chapter of Isaiah. The precious
     promises of the enlargement of Christ’s Church came with
     much power to my mind; the last verse was very encouraging,
     and raised much joy, from the hope that I might be honoured
     to be one of ‘the little ones’ who should ‘become a
     thousand, and a strong nation.’ The prospect of all these
     swarms of people bowing to the sceptre and dominion of
     Jesus, filled my soul with exultation. I found much freedom
     in prayer, and spent some time in joy and rejoicing. The
     budgerow being much longer in coming up than was expected,
     occasioned great anxiety; and, to my shame be it spoken,
     impatience. O how fickle is my mind: but Jesus liveth, and
     He changeth not! Blessed be God for Jesus Christ! I came on
     board about two o’clock this afternoon; and we are now at
     anchor about ten miles below Calcutta.

     “Sept. 21st, 1806. Yesterday morning, being tired of
     waiting any longer for a fair wind, I left the budgerow
     about five o’clock, and came up in the tow-boat to
     Calcutta. The scene on each side of the river was much
     the same as during the preceding day; but being indisposed
     from want of food, and by exposure to the sun, I felt but
     little lively joy. Read in the Bible, and Newton’s Hymns;
     and found much desire to be grateful for preservation
     during the voyage, for meeting with kind friends, and for
     the abundant supply of every temporal want; above all, that
     notwithstanding my manifold failings, some sense of my
     obligations to God in Christ still remains. The sight of
     Calcutta afforded me great satisfaction: the approach to it
     was tedious; and I felt some impatience at the perversity
     of the boatmen. Alas, the depravity of my nature is but
     little subdued! I walked up to the church, and inquired
     in vain for Martyn: went to Doughty’s hotel, where I met
     V. at the door, who, I feared, was oppressed in spirit
     and suffering from the effects of climate. I took some
     refreshment, and was about to go forth in quest of Martyn,
     when a note arrived from him, desiring me to go to him in
     the college.[12] I set off immediately, and was received
     by him with the most lively demonstrations of joy. Here I
     was desired to take up my abode; and here I am fixed for
     the present. Mr. Brown,[13] to whom I am indebted for my
     present entertainment, appears a sensible, determined,
     pious man; very different from the descriptions I heard of
     him during the voyage.”

On the same day, in which these particulars are noticed in his
journal, Mr. C. sent a letter to his sister; written, as it appears,
at intervals during his voyage, and communicating information up to
the period of his arrival at Calcutta. The letter itself is not less
remarkable for its plain good sense, than as manifesting that strong
natural affection and love of country, which entered so largely into
the character of the writer:

     “From the date of this letter, (Sep. 21st.) you will
     perceive how much longer our voyage has proved than at
     the beginning of it we hoped it would. Twenty weeks are
     completed since we left Portsmouth: the usual time a voyage
     of the kind occupies is about fifteen weeks. The chief
     part of our delay was between St. Iago, and the Cape of
     Good Hope. Before we arrived at St. Iago, we had fair and
     strong winds; and since we got round the Cape, the weather
     has proved most agreeable. A thousand anxious thoughts
     daily fill my mind on your account: separation from you has
     only tended to show how much my comfort depended on you:
     scarcely for two successive waking hours has your image
     been out of my remembrance. I am very anxious that you
     should come out to me; and I am very anxious respecting
     your voyage. You have little, humanly speaking, to fear
     from dangers of the sea. Your greatest inconvenience
     will arise from not having a person with whom you can
     communicate freely: to be under a restraint of this kind,
     for five months, is a greater evil than you can at present
     suppose. You will, no doubt, hear of some lady coming
     out, with whom you can take half of a cabin; and if such
     an opportunity offers, you need not hesitate to embrace
     it. But you will need to use great caution how you trust
     strangers; and by no means be too familiar with any of
     the passengers, till you have had time to observe their
     dispositions: the evil of a contrary conduct has appeared
     very strikingly with us; and still more so in some other
     of the ships of our fleet. It is very easy to assume an
     appearance of gaiety and good-humour, when people only
     meet occasionally, and for a short time; but when they
     come to live together, and are obliged to meet each other
     at every turn, without Divine grace, few tempers are found
     sufficiently accommodating to maintain that forbearance,
     and to make those concessions, which are absolutely
     necessary to peace and comfort. Hence, when by an unguarded
     confidence, persons of contrary dispositions and habits
     have committed themselves to each other, they soon become
     mutually disgusted; family circumstances are exposed;
     weaknesses ridiculed; and contempt and hatred follows. You
     see I write under the idea that you will not leave England
     till you hear of my arrival in India. I have only to add,
     that my health is much improved since I left you.

     “Since I began this letter, a variety of events have taken
     place, and crowd so fast on my mind, that I know not
     where or how to relate them. On entering Madras roads in
     the evening, the lights reflected from the houses built
     on the shore, with the sound of the sentinels’ voices
     passing the word, and the striking of the clocks, formed
     altogether the most remarkable impression I recollect in
     life. After having for five months been separated from the
     civilized world in a great measure, and having seen only
     the boundless ocean, and occasionally hailing some of our
     consorts, you may suppose the entrance into society was
     highly gratifying. My joy was silent, and chiefly expressed
     in ejaculations of praise to Him who had so graciously
     preserved us through the great deep; nor were wanting
     prayers for my native land, and for the many dear objects
     left behind. This pleasant temper of mind was, however,
     of short continuance, as soon as we came to anchor, some
     of the natives came off in catamarans; they were almost
     naked, and very savage in appearance. The consideration of
     being, in all probability, to spend the remainder of my
     life among such wretched beings, filled me with melancholy;
     and rendered me sleepless during the greater part of the
     night; and the whole of the next day, I was very unhappy.
     But you will perceive my sin and unbelief in this matter;
     as their wretchedness should rather have excited compassion
     and anxiety for bettering their condition: the idea of no
     further comfort remaining for me, certainly arose from the
     absence of the proper influence of that precious truth, ‘If
     He give peace, who then can cause trouble?’ I perceive this
     clearly now; and I am thankful that I am able to take the
     comfort of it to myself. During the whole of our stay, the
     anniversary festival of one of their idols was celebrating
     at a pagoda or temple, in sight of the house where we were.
     Their chief solemnities were celebrated during the night;
     and consisted in most wretchedly bad music, something like
     bad bag-pipes, accompanied with a tom-tom, or small drum
     unbraced, and incapable of music; with these, at intervals,
     loud shouts were set up by the people, and something of a
     song in praise of their idol sung in alternate strains,
     which were responded by the people to each other in a
     sing-song tone of voice. O what a blessing is the Gospel
     to mankind! Well might the angels sing at Messiah’s birth,
     ‘goodwill towards men,’ no less than ‘glory to God!’ How
     lovely does Christianity appear, contrasted with the
     absurdities of these pitiable heathen! O, how privileged
     is Britain, where Divine truth shines forth in all its
     purity! May my happy native land know the value of her
     privileges, and improve them: O that, to latest ages, her
     rulers may continue nursing fathers, and nursing mothers
     to the Church; and use their widely-extended influence in
     rendering their colonies happy as themselves!”


        [6] In 1806, Napoleon placed his brother, Jerome
            Buonaparte, in command of a squadron of eight ships
            of the line, which were ostensibly destined for the
            West Indies.

        [7] Cadets.

        [8] A species of raft used by the natives of Madras.

        [9] A kind of general Agent.

       [10] A kind of gig.

       [11] A native travelling boat.

       [12] The College of Fort William.

       [13] The late Rev. David Brown, at that time Chaplain at
            the Presidency, and Provost of the College of Fort
            William.




                            CHAPTER III.

                   AT ALDEEN--APPOINTED TO CHUNAR.


On Mr. Corrie’s arrival in Bengal both he and Mr. Parson took up
their abode with Mr. Brown at Aldeen, a short distance from Calcutta,
and remained under the same hospitable roof until they proceeded
to the stations that had been assigned to them respectively by the
government. Henry Martyn was their fellow-guest for a time, and with
that honoured servant of God Mr. Corrie’s intimacy was close and
brotherly. Mr. C. was also in the habit of preaching regularly during
his residence with Mr. Brown, and of maintaining constant intercourse
with the whole body of Christian Missionaries in Calcutta and
Serampore. In his Journal, too, occur many intimations of the anxious
affection with which he regarded such of the Cadets as remained
within reach of his visits, or were willing to correspond with him.
A peculiar regard for the welfare of young persons was, in fact, a
distinguishing feature of Mr. Corrie’s character.

Early in December 1806, Mr. Corrie and Mr. Parson left Aldeen, the
one having been appointed at Chunar, the other at Berhampore. As
respects Mr. C. it will be seen, that during the whole of his journey
to the place of his destination, the subject of the conversion of the
heathen occupied a large portion of his thoughts.


                    FIRST IMPRESSIONS OF CALCUTTA.

     “Calcutta strikes me as the most magnificent city in
     the world; and I am made most happy by the hope of
     being instrumental to the eternal good of many. A great
     opposition, I find, is raised against Martyn, and the
     principles he preaches; this gives me no uneasiness--by
     the help of God, I will stand fast in the doctrine of
     Christ crucified, and maintain it against all opposition.
     But, Lord, grant me the wisdom that is from above, that I
     may act with discretion, and in nothing give unnecessary
     offence!

     “At three o’clock,[14] Martyn preached from Rom. iii.
     21-23, the most impressive and best composition I ever
     heard. The disposition of love and good will which appeared
     in him must have had great effect; and the calmness and
     firmness with which he spoke raised in me great wonder.
     May God grant a blessing to the word. O may it silence
     opposition, and promote religion for Jesus Christ’s sake,
     Amen.

     “Tuesday, Sept. 30th. I have neglected for some time to
     make a memorandum of occurrences; but remember, that in
     general, my mind has been without any lively sense of
     divine things; though my heart has been going out much
     after God. The joy expressed by the few serious people here
     is very great; and were not those comforts withheld which
     I have been some time favoured with, their kindness would
     have a tendency to make me proud: for, Oh! I feel an evil
     heart cleaving to the world, though not under its former
     shape. I am not without a secret uneasiness, that I have
     not talents to render me equally acceptable with others.
     This is not to be content with God’s appointments; though,
     I think, I would not have others brought to my standard,
     but would rise to their’s, that God may be more glorified.
     I have received great kindness from Mr. Brown, and much
     benefit from his conversation. Blessed be God, I feel no
     disposition to shrink from the shame of the cross, but
     hope, with boldness, to declare myself a fellow-labourer
     with Martyn, in the controversy excited by his preaching.

     “I preached on Sunday [Sept. 28,] evening, at the Mission
     Church, from 2 Thess. i. 7-10: my mind was somewhat
     impressed with the importance of my office, both before
     and during the service. I trust the furtherance of God’s
     glory, and the good of souls, was, and is, my prevailing
     desire. Went up to Serampore yesterday, and in the evening
     was present at the marriage of Mr. Desgranges.[15] Mr.
     Brown entered into their concerns with much interest. The
     pagoda[16] was fixed on, and lighted up for the celebration
     of the wedding; at eight o’clock the parties came from
     the Mission house, [at Serampore] attended by most of
     the family. Mr. Brown commenced with the hymn, ‘Come,
     gracious Spirit, heavenly dove!’ A divine influence seemed
     to attend us, and most delightful were my sensations. The
     circumstance of so many being engaged in spreading the
     glad tidings of salvation,--the temple of an idol converted
     to the purpose of Christian worship, and the Divine
     presence felt among us,--filled me with joy unspeakable.
     After the marriage service of the Church of England, Mr.
     Brown gave out ‘the Wedding hymn;’ and after signing
     certificates of the marriage, we adjourned to the house,
     where Mr. Brown had provided supper. Two hymns given out by
     Mr. Marshman[17] were felt very powerfully. He is a most
     lively, sanguine missionary; his conversation made my heart
     burn within me, and I find desires of spreading the Gospel
     growing stronger daily, and my zeal in the cause more
     ardent. But O ‘my leanness’ in comparison of these ‘burning
     and shining lights’ around me. Yet, in the strength of
     Jehovah will I go forward, and will tread in their steps,
     and pursue them at a distance, though I may not hope to
     come near their attainments.

     “Oct. 10th. I have for some time past been oppressed with
     a sense of the want of spiritual affections: my heart as
     cold as ice, no mouth to speak of, or for God: deadness in
     prayer, and languor in every spiritual duty. I perceive
     my great insufficiency for the work of the ministry; and
     lament exceedingly my small opportunities of education,[18]
     and my sinful negligence in not better improving those I
     had. ‘God be merciful to me a sinner,’ and perfect praise
     to Himself out of my weak and unskilful mouth! Last night
     I went to the Mission-house, [at Serampore] and supped
     at the same table with about fifty native converts. The
     triumph of the cross was most evident in breaking down
     their prejudices, and uniting them with those who formerly
     were an abomination in their eyes. After supper, they sang
     a Bengalee hymn, many of them with tears of joy; and they
     concluded with prayer in Bengalee, with evident earnestness
     and emotion. My own feelings were too big for utterance.
     O may the time be hastened when every tongue shall confess
     Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father!

     “On Friday evening, [Oct. 10th.] we had a meeting in the
     pagoda, at which almost all the missionaries, some of their
     wives, and Captain W. attended: with a view to commend
     Martyn to the favour and protection of God in his work. The
     Divine presence was with us. I felt more than it would have
     been proper to express. Mr. Brown commenced with a hymn and
     prayer, Mr. Desgranges succeeded him, with much devotion
     and sweetness of expression: Mr. Marshman followed, and
     dwelt particularly on the promising appearance of things;
     and, with much humility, pleaded God’s promises for the
     enlargement of Zion; with many petitions for Mr. Brown and
     his family. The service was concluded by Mr. Carey,[19]
     who was earnest in prayer for Mr. Brown: the petition that
     ‘having laboured for many years without encouragement or
     support, in the evening it might be light,’ seemed much
     to affect his own mind, and greatly impressed us all.
     Afterwards we supped together at Mr. Brown’s. The influence
     of this association remained on my mind, and shed a divine
     peace and composure through my soul.

     “Sunday 12th. This day I preached at the New Church from
     Gal. vi. 14. The Governor General, &c., attended. I felt a
     good deal of palpitation before I ascended the pulpit, but
     afterwards experienced great composure of mind; and had no
     idea that any one would be offended, being conscious that I
     was speaking the truth. I found much earnestness in prayer
     before, and after, divine service. God grant an increase to
     His own word for Jesus Christ’s sake!

     “Oct. 13th. I came to Serampore to dinner. Had a
     pleasant sail up the river: the time passed agreeably in
     conversation. In the evening a fire was kindled on the
     opposite bank; and we soon perceived that it was a funeral
     pile, on which the wife was burning with the dead body of
     her husband. It was too dark to distinguish the miserable
     victim of superstition; but by the light of the flames
     we could discover a great crowd of people: their horrid
     noise, and senseless music, joined with the testimony of
     some of the servants, convinced us that our apprehensions
     were founded on fact. The noise continued till ten o’clock,
     and the fire was kept burning till that time. My mind was
     struck with horror and pity. On going out to walk with
     Martyn to the pagoda, the noise so unnatural, and so little
     calculated to excite joy, raised in my mind an awful sense
     of the presence and influence of evil spirits. O that
     the Lord would command his word to run and be glorified,
     in casting them out, and placing in their stead the mild
     influence of his Gospel!

     “Oct. 18th, 1806. On Wednesday last, Mr. Brown, Parson
     and myself proceeded up the river with Martyn, to set him
     on his way to Dinapore. We landed at Ghyretee, and walked
     through a most delightful avenue; afterwards through a neat
     village (for this country), and arrived at Chandernagore
     about seven o’clock: we took tea at a tavern, and went
     on board our budgerow, about nine o’clock. After joining
     in prayer, we retired to rest. On Thursday morning,
     we proceeded to Chinsurah, on foot, through groves of
     fruit trees; we arrived at Chinsurah soon after seven
     o’clock, and received a most hospitable reception from
     Mr. Forsyth:[20] after dinner, we went with Mr. F. above
     Bandell; and after worship, returned to Chinsurah in &
     _paunchway_.[21] Yesterday morning, the weather having
     commenced rainy, we determined to return to Aldeen, on
     account of Mr. Brown’s boat becoming uninhabitable. We
     first engaged, according to arrangement, in alternate
     prayer. Mr. Brown commenced with reading a portion of
     Scripture, singing a hymn, and prayer, which order was
     observed by P., myself, and Martyn. A sense of the Divine
     presence was experienced by each of us, and our consolation
     in Christ Jesus abounded; so that we left our friend
     without regret, and he parted with us cheerfully; each
     persuaded that God was with us, and would be our ‘shield
     and exceeding great reward.’

     “Oct. 22nd. On coming down the river, I saw the figures
     of Doorga[22] paraded on the river, and the indecencies
     of idol-worship. My mind was inexpressibly grieved; and
     most earnestly did I desire to be able to address the poor
     deluded heathen.

     “Nov. 3rd. For some time past I have made no memoranda
     of the state of my mind. Alas, my wretched backwardness
     to any really good thing! In general my heart has been
     hard and insensible, though my desire has been to the
     contrary; and I have had but little inclination to pray,
     though no disposition to give up prayer; and sometimes have
     experienced enlargement of heart, and melting of soul in
     prayer. I have preached several times at the Old Church,
     and once at the New. My purposes of labouring among the
     heathen are, I bless God, more fixed; and a desire to be at
     my station, and about my proper work, grows upon me.

     “When I hear of a spirit of covetousness which has affected
     many, I fear and tremble; and I think something of that
     disposition was working within me this morning. Oh! how
     often have I said that I desire not to leave one shilling
     behind me at death. I would record my own declaration,
     beseeching thee, O Lord, that I may be enabled to trust
     thee for future supplies, and to live by faith upon thee
     for daily bread!

     “24th, For some days past my mind has enjoyed quiet and
     peace with God; my indisposition has been in a great
     measure removed, and I can speak and act as usual. ‘Praise
     God from whom all blessings flow.’ My mind has been calm
     and resigned to the will of God, in the prospect of my
     destination, and in my preparation to set out for Chunar;
     but little, alas! of lively affection, with much wandering
     of heart in prayer. The youths who came out with me have
     been much on my mind. My dear relatives have not had so
     particular an interest in my prayers as at some other
     times; but their welfare is exceedingly dear to me, and the
     prospect of having my sister with me very cheering.

     “Nov. 29th. This morning Mr. Brown, Parson, Mr.
     Thompson[23] (of Madras), and myself, met in the pagoda
     at Aldeen, to consult in what way we may most effectually
     promote the glory of our redeeming God in the earth. After
     prayer by Mr. Brown, and after some conversation, we
     agreed, 1st. To join in the views, and aid to the utmost of
     our power, the purposes of the British and Foreign Bible
     Society: 2ndly. To help forward the translation of the
     Scriptures into the languages of the East, as much as in
     us lies; and to take the expense of the Sanscrit and Greek
     Testaments upon ourselves: and 3rdly. To make a quarterly
     report of our prospects, our plans, and actual situation in
     our various stations, as far as the Church is concerned, to
     Mr. Brown; who will add his own, and cause a copy of the
     whole to be transmitted to each individual. After prayer we
     separated.

     “Dec. 8. To-day set off for Chunar. In the strength of the
     Lord God I go forth. O, prepare a people for Thyself, and
     make me the instrument of gathering them into thy fold!
     Keep me by thy mighty power in body and soul; and enlarge
     my heart that I may delight in Thy will, and lay out all my
     time and labour in Thy service! Amen, Lord Jesus. Amen!

     “Dec. 13th. On Monday last Parson and myself left Aldeen,
     to proceed to our stations; Mr. Brown and Mr. Thompson
     accompanying us. We arrived at Chinsurah about three
     o’clock, after a quick sail up the river, the tide being
     in our favour: we called on Mr. Forsyth, with whom we
     spent the evening. Mr. F. conducted family worship, and
     was excellent in the application, and very fervent for
     the fulfilment of many precious promises. The presence of
     God was with us. Mr. F. gave me favourable intelligence
     respecting General M. at Chunar, to which place Mr. L.
     had sent tracts, which had been noticed with approbation
     by the General. I hope the Lord has prepared my way.
     Yesterday morning, after breakfast and family worship, we
     set forward, Mr. Forsyth accompanying us. In the evening
     we walked on the bank, whilst the boatmen hauled our boat
     along. The encouragement and comfort his conversation
     raised in my mind will, I hope, never be forgotten: much
     lively and spiritual conversation passed, chiefly on
     the means most suitable for us to employ under present
     circumstances. We concluded by commissioning Messrs. Brown
     and T. to buy Bibles, Testaments, and Common Prayer-books,
     to be sent to us from time to time for distribution. Our
     friends left us to return to Calcutta. A sweet composure
     fills my heart: and, without regret, I leave all that earth
     and sense hold dear, to do thy will, O my God! Let me find
     strength according to my day; and call Thou me to any
     thing in which I may most glorify Thee. Leave me not for a
     moment; for though now, ‘by thy goodness, thou hast made
     my mountain strong,’ yet if thou hide thy face I shall be
     ‘troubled!’

     “Dec. 14th. Yesterday morning we left Sook Saugur: in the
     afternoon our attention was arrested by loud lamentations:
     we observed a dying man put into the river to expire; this,
     in the opinion of the Hindoos, insuring Paradise. We were
     much shocked at the spectacle. Lord, how long, how long
     shall Satan triumph? Four out of six are killed in this
     way, and hurried out of life.”

On the 16th of December, Mr. Corrie writes to his father:--

     “I am now on my way to my station at Chunar, five days’
     journey from Calcutta, and three from Berhampore. To this
     last place Parson is appointed, and we are together in
     the same boat; after which I have eight weeks’ journey
     alone. I have, however, several introductions to christian
     friends on the way, and Martyn’s station is before me,
     where I intend to stay a few days with him. My mind is at
     perfect ease, and my soul happy in the love of God, and
     overflowing with gratitude to the Giver of all good. Much
     and unexpected kindness has been shewn me in this strange
     land; and I have found that whosoever forsaketh aught for
     Christ shall reap an hundred-fold ‘in the present life:’
     how, then, can I doubt the fulfilment of that part of the
     promise which relates to the life to come? In the house
     of Mr. Brown, every attention that affection could think
     of has been shewn me.... The country through which we
     have come, is, in general, very pleasant, though flat. We
     walk on the bank morning and evening; and amuse ourselves
     with finding out resemblances, or fancied resemblances to
     scenes we remember in Britain. We have every comfort we can
     wish for; and our morning and evening worship, consisting
     of singing, prayer, and reading the Scriptures, tends to
     revive our souls; whilst we walk as friends, and take sweet
     counsel together on the ends and means we purpose in our
     ministry. I have written so often that I forget what I
     may have said to you; but you who know how much I am the
     creature of impulse in every thing--except my expressions
     of affection for you all, and in matters of fact,--will
     not judge of the state of my mind from one single letter.
     I allude especially to what I have written respecting the
     conversion of the heathen. _You_ know, what _I_ now know,
     how sanguine I am in schemes that my soul enters into; and
     oft have I made calculations and statements which have
     afterwards made me blush.--The state of society among our
     own countrymen here is much altered for the better within
     these few years. The Marquis Wellesley openly patronized
     religion; whether from motives of state policy or not, it
     is not ours to judge. He on every possible opportunity,
     made moral character a _sine quâ non_ to his patronage,
     and sought for men of character from every quarter to fill
     offices of trust. He avowedly encouraged, and contributed
     to, the translation of the Scriptures into the native
     languages; and wherever he went, paid a strict regard to
     divine worship on the Sunday. Before his time, all causes
     were tried in the courts of justice, through the medium of
     interpreters; but by the College which he instituted, he
     furnished the natives with judges capable of determining
     from their own knowledge of the language, and judgment on
     the evidence; and has thus laid the foundation of peace
     and justice, such as Asia before knew not. _He has been
     the saviour of India to Britain._ The state of the natives
     in a moral point of view is deplorable; the most shocking
     indecencies form a part of their worship; and lying,
     cheating, &c., are not considered crimes. Two youths who
     were seriously impressed during the voyage, and one who
     was our fellow-passenger, and has since been brought to
     consideration, are going on consistently in the ways of
     wisdom. These first-fruits of our Indian engagement afford
     me the most lively encouragement, and the strongest hope
     that God is with me of a truth. O may He be a spirit of
     power in my own heart, and a word of power in my mouth,
     that many may be turned unto righteousness: then I am sure
     that you will bless the day that took me from you, and we
     shall rejoice together in the loving-kindness of our God!”

But to return to the Journal:

     “December 18th. This evening we are at Plassy. Walking on
     the bank of the river, we passed an old man brought down to
     die by the river-side: he exhibited signs of considerable
     vitality; and certainly no symptoms of immediate
     dissolution. My spirit was stirred within me; and a Brahmin
     coming past, I began to talk to him on the wickedness of
     killing men in this way. He said his shasters[24] commanded
     it, and that the doctor had pronounced the man dying. I
     told him that God did no injury to man; that He was good;
     and, therefore, the shasters were not God’s word; and that
     God was displeased at such proceedings; he understood me,
     and pleaded their customs. I answered, that the custom,
     the shasters, and the people, were all bad; and that
     when he died he would go down and lie in fire for ever.
     He evidently understood me and seemed confounded. I then
     told him that at Cutwa, a Sahib lived, who would give him
     the true word of God, and recommended him to go there. It
     appeared, however, that he came from Moorshedebad, and
     showed no disposition to return to Cutwa. Passing on, we
     found a party going to Juggernauth. I asked one of them,
     Why he went there? What use it would be to him, and what
     good it would do to him? He seemed confounded, and made no
     reply. I told him also of the anger of God, and of the fire
     after death. A Birajee[25] came running after us to beg; he
     was an old man. On being told by him what he was, I said
     to him, that he was a lazy man that would do no work, but
     only eat, and that God was angry with him, and that when he
     died he would go down to fire for ever. He was surprised at
     this reception, and could only plead his age. I recommended
     him to Cutwa. This is my first effort at missionary work:
     but O, how I blush, and abhor myself, for the imperfect
     manner I speak for God. I know enough of the language to
     have conveyed different ideas, and more of them, but I
     am nothing, and know nothing. Lord, grant me wisdom and
     utterance; and, O, smile on my feeble attempts for the
     furtherance of thine own glory, through Christ Jesus!

     “Dec. 21st. We are now by the kind providence of God at
     Berhampore. On Friday Mr. Grant and Mr. Ellerton stopped
     our boat, about one o’clock, and we stayed at that place
     all night. We met, also, with Messrs. B. and their
     friends; one a youth from England, by the Nelson. They
     also stayed with us; and in the evening, we were joined by
     two officers, going down to Calcutta. We made a party of
     eight, and sat up till twelve, talking to little profit,
     chiefly about the siege of Bhurtpore. Yesterday morning
     we separated, and were accompanied the whole of the day by
     the Messrs. B., who joined with us in morning and evening
     worship.

     “Dec. 23rd, 1806. (Bogwongola). Yesterday morning we waited
     on General P. and afterwards visited the place appointed
     for public worship, a large upper room. In the afternoon,
     we visited the hospital. I drew near the bed of a man
     apparently in the last stage of disease, who received the
     word with tears, and requested me to pray with him. Having
     made this known, P. invited the others to draw near: a
     large party collected from all parts of the hospital. I
     expounded the third chapter of St. John’s Gospel, and
     prayed. Much attention in the poor men.

     “I left Berhampore this morning at seven o’clock; and,
     after passing through a well-cultivated and fertile
     country, arrived here at twelve. I am now on the great
     river, proceeding to Mr. Creighton[26] at Gomalty. I am
     much pained at heart on account of separation from dear
     Parson, and disheartened at the prospect of being so long
     on the way to Chunar; and tired with the importunity of the
     natives. Never, never have I felt so keenly the separation
     from dear relatives; but I have no wish to draw back, but
     would pray and hope that “God will be the strength of my
     heart, and my portion for ever,” in and through Jesus
     Christ.

     “Dec. 26th. Last night I arrived at Gomalty, and found
     a very kind reception from Mr. Creighton. In the course
     of conversation, I have learned that he, with Messrs.
     Ellerton and Grant, have instituted about twelve schools
     in the villages, in this neighbourhood, in which many
     children of the poor natives are taught to read and write;
     and christian tracts, and the New Testament in Bengalee
     are read to them, and by them. One Brahmin objected to
     the reading the Holy Scirptures; but, some parts of them
     being read to him, his objections were removed, and he
     considered that they were very good. In one of the schools
     the master is a Brahmin, who teaches these tracts, &c.;
     though he says, that if the sentiments contained in them
     prevail, the Brahmin’s power will soon be at an end.
     The salary allowed the teachers is five rupees[27] per
     month; for which they teach as many children as choose
     to come. In one school about seventy or eighty children
     attended at first; and about forty still continue to
     come. In this school thirty have been taught, and are
     gone off to different employments. Many of the boys have
     made considerable proficiency in reading and writing; and
     through them, the knowledge of the Scriptures is diffused
     to a considerable extent; the consequence is, that much
     less dissension is found in the neighbourhood; so that when
     the native missionaries come amongst them, the people are
     much more ready to hear them than in other districts. They
     hear, also, with much attention, and in general approve of
     Christian truth.

     “Dec. 27th. To-day Mr. Creighton sent for the schoolmaster
     of the place with his little charge, about fourteen: some
     others were in the habit of attending, but were at this
     time absent. The method of teaching is by writing the
     character in the sand, and then pronouncing the letter;
     thus they learn both to read and write at the same time:
     some of the children have made considerable advancement.
     The manners of the children are much the same as those
     of children at home; and much gratification did their
     contented faces and their little tricks afford me.

     “Dec. 29th. Yesterday morning Messrs. W. the two B’s and
     A. came over to attend Divine worship. At ten o’clock we
     went and heard the Bengalee missionaries preach to their
     countrymen: the three appear to be humble and sincere
     Christians. Those who understood them say, that the
     preaching was very energetic and eloquent.

     “Gomalty, Jan. 1st. 1807. I would begin the new year by
     reviewing the old. The mercies of the past year are
     many and great; and, for these mercies, I am bound to be
     exceedingly thankful. During the voyage, my attempts were
     not without some good effects on the minds of V. and Y.
     especially: the Lord made my presence a restraint on some
     who would otherwise have been more profane, and gave me
     favour in the sight of many: kind friends have been raised
     up for me in India, wherever I have come, and all my wants
     have been abundantly supplied. These mercies call for the
     loudest praise to Him who rules on high; but especially do
     spiritual mercies call for gratitude: that I have been kept
     from gross sins before men; that I have not been permitted
     wholly to restrain prayer before God, or to cast off His
     fear; that I have been enabled in public preaching to
     declare what I believe to be the whole counsel of God; and
     that some tokens of Divine approbation have been granted
     to His word. I feel a growing boldness to speak for God in
     private, and something more of a power to cast off the fear
     of man. These are subjects which may well furnish matter
     for everlasting songs. I would record what I feel still
     wrong, that I may be disposed to live more simply on Christ
     for strength as well as righteousness. I find a disposition
     to seek the applause of men, which sometimes leads me into
     words and actions which grieve the Holy Spirit, and wound
     my own soul. There is a sinful nature; a disposition to
     rest in the form of godliness; and a spirit of indolence
     which causes me to waste hours and days to no profit.
     These things grieve and bow down my soul. I would, also,
     record my purposes, that I may be bound to perform them. I
     intend to keep aloof from visiting parties at Chunar, as
     much as I can; to establish worship as often as possible;
     and to teach and preach Jesus Christ, ‘publicly and from
     house to house,’ both to professed Christians, and to the
     heathen. But, when I reflect how most of my resolutions
     have hitherto come to nothing, O Lord, let thy power rest
     upon me! I would record my most earnest desires, to mark
     the Lord’s dealings with me, and His answers to prayer. My
     first desire is, that a ‘door may be opened’ at Chunar,
     and that I may have power to enter in thereat, that so
     ‘the word of God may have free course and be glorified’
     in the conversion of souls. Secondly, that my dear family
     may be the special objects of the favour of Jehovah; and
     that my dear sister may come out to me, _if it be the will
     of God, otherwise not_. Thirdly, that V., Y., and B., may
     be kept from the power of the devil, the world, and the
     flesh; and that they may be redeemed and preserved from
     all iniquity, and have liberty to serve God without fear.
     Fourthly, that the choicest mercies both of Providence and
     Grace, may descend on all whose hearts have been disposed
     to favour me; and that the Government of India may be
     disposed to _permit_, at least, attempts for the conversion
     of the natives; and that the kingdom of Christ may come.
     And, O Lord, I would devote my life, my strength, my every
     faculty, and every gift of grace, nature, or providence,
     wholly to thy service and glory! I offer myself to Thee.
     O pardon, accept, and bless me, through Jesus Christ; and
     bring these purposes to good effect, for thy name’s sake!

     “Jan. 6th. Left Mr. Creighton at Gomalty yesterday morning.
     In travelling, found my mind somewhat stayed on God. I
     welcomed the budgerow, and the dreary river, as old though
     inconvenient friends, who would put me in the way of active
     usefulness. I was much pleased with the school in Mr. C.’s
     bungalow; and, from the pleasure the Brahmin showed, in
     making the scholars read the Bengalee New Testament, I have
     a hopeful presentiment that the kingdom of Satan, thus
     divided against itself, cannot stand long.

     “Jan. 16th. This morning, I visited the wells near
     Monghyr.[28] One of the wells is cold; but close to it,
     another bubbles up water, like the bubbles that rise from
     the bottom of a caldron as the water grows hot. I found
     this water so hot, that I was scarcely able to bear my
     hand in it. Here, they say, Ram’s wife bathed, after she
     had been stolen away, and recovered again by her husband.
     Many Brahmins and Faqueers were staying there; and were
     very importunate for money. With a _buckshish_[29] I
     offered tracts, and was immediately told that a Sahib, a
     short time since, had left many. A very interesting boy,
     about fifteen years of age, read in one of the tracts, and
     told me that it meant, There is only one God, and that all
     their poojahs, &c., are vain. I spoke to him, and an old
     man, with several around; the boy seemed to understand
     perfectly what I meant; and said, that when he understood
     the matter thoroughly, he should leave off poojah; and,
     as I spake of hell as the portion of wicked men, several
     behind showed symptoms of scorn. The old man discovered
     much impatience, but, for the _buckshish_, stayed till I
     had said all that I thought necessary. The boy’s father
     manifested uneasiness, and evidently wished his son away;
     but for the same reason permitted him to stay. The father
     said, that Adam was first created, and that all men are his
     children: that the world was drowned, and then Noah became
     the parent of us all. I replied that it was true; and that
     Adam and Noah worshipped God, and paid no regard to poojahs
     and the river. Why, then, did they pay that regard to the
     creature, which was due only to God? He answered, that when
     God should give all the world to be of the same opinion, it
     would be so. To which I replied, That it was true; and that
     in England we worshipped God as Adam and Noah did; and that
     now the word was sent to him.

     “Jan. 26th. On Friday, I left the budgerow, and came
     through a most fertile country to Dinapore. I observed some
     of the customs of the natives which explained passages of
     Scripture. In the evening, the conversation of dear Martyn
     seemed to drive away all pain; but weakness soon made me
     wish for rest. Yesterday, I preached here to an attentive
     people, from Matt. vii. 21-23. Some of the officers
     scoffed. Oh! what cause for thankfulness in the sweet
     communion I am favoured with in Martyn, and in the kindness
     I meet with on all hands! O for a heart to praise the Lord
     for his goodness! O for power to do His will, to love His
     work; and for a spirit of compassion for perishing souls!

     “Jan. 29th. Just leaving Dinapore to proceed to Chunar, in
     tolerable health and spirits. I have found but little of
     spiritual comfort; though much pleasure in communion with
     dear Martyn. My purposes of labouring amongst the heathen
     are much revived, encouraged and strengthened, by the
     conversation of this dear friend: we agreed to exchange
     letters every other Monday. I found the vanity of worldly
     pursuits in the society I went into; and perceive afresh
     that God is alone the fit and satisfying portion of the
     soul. O may I live under this impression, and may my life
     and conduct testify that it is a divine impression!

     “Feb. 15th. On approaching Chunar, the appearance of
     the fort struck me as beautiful; but, from the reports
     of its unhealthiness, I was ready to consider it as my
     grave, and approached it with a heavy heart. I have found
     some earnestness and liberty in praying for a blessing
     on my entrance in amongst them. I trust the Lord will be
     entreated.”


       [14] On Sunday, Sept. 21.

       [15] One of the London Society’s Missionaries.

       [16] The Hindoo temple of the idol Bullub, which the
            Brahmins had deserted. Mr. Brown had repaired,
            and fitted it up as a family chapel and study.
            The pagoda was, also, sometimes appropriated
            to the accommodation of Mr. Brown’s particular
            friends.--MEMORIAL SKETCHES OF REV. D. BROWN, p. 137.

       [17] Baptist Missionary.

       [18] During the four years that Mr. Corrie resided in the
            neighbourhood of London, little or no attention was
            paid to his education.

       [19] Baptist Missionary.

       [20] One of the London Society’s Missionaries.

       [21] A small covered boat.

       [22] One of the principal Hindoo female deities.

       [23] The Rev. Marmaduke Thompson, late Chaplain at Madras.

       [24] Holy books.

       [25] A kind of religious mendicant.

       [26] Superintendent of Indigo works.

       [27] About ten shillings sterling.

       [28] The celebrated hot-well named “Seetacoom,”--the
            fountain of Seeta.--BISHOP HEBER’S JOURNAL.

       [29] Present.




                             CHAPTER IV.

                        SETTLEMENT AT CHUNAR.


Chunar, the first scene of Mr. Corrie’s stated ministry in India,
used to be a place of greater importance than it is now that the
frontier of the British Empire has been so much extended in all
directions. The fortress is spread over the sides of a high rock
which is washed by the Ganges; and although the place is not
considered unhealthy, yet during some months in the year, the heat
at Chunar is intense. The Europeans stationed there, when Mr. C.
was chaplain, were all military, and for the most part invalids,
who, though unfit for active service, were equal to garrison-duty.
Besides those Europeans and some Sepoys, there were a few half-castes
of Portuguese extraction, and some native women who followed the
army. Without the cantonments was a Hindoo and Mahomedan population
amounting to 10,000 or 12,000 souls. The Europeans, also, at Secrole
(about twelve miles from Chunar) became afterwards part of Mr.
Corrie’s charge; whilst the vast heathen population of Benares, with
its cruel and senseless superstitions, opened out a large field for
the exercise of missionary zeal and christian philanthropy.

The extracts given below from Mr. Corrie’s journal and Letters,
will explain the nature of his official duties, and missionary
operations. It will be seen that he had many obstacles to encounter
in his efforts to impart the knowledge of Christ to those “who lay
in darkness and in the shadow of death.”[30] Among the many trials,
too, which his faith had to sustain, not the least will appear to
have arisen from the determined hostility to all missionary labours,
manifested by the Government of India; in forgetfulness, it may be
presumed, of the great truth, that as “the kingdoms of this world
are” destined to “become the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ,”
all opposition to the spread of Christianity is hostility to the
“King of kings.”[31]

     “Sunday, Feb. 22nd. This day I begin my labours at Chunar,
     and have much reason to adore him who heareth prayer, for
     smoothing my way, and opening a door of hope that good will
     be done. I arose at five o’clock this morning and prepared
     for divine service. At seven o’clock, I went to the place
     of worship, and found there the effective artillery-men,
     the garrison invalids, and several of the others, with the
     Colonel, Captain P., Lieut. A., and the invalid officers
     D. and H. with some other officers of the Fort. Observed
     several very attentive. At half past nine o’clock I went to
     the hospital, and found a table set, and the people very
     ready to hear, and attentive. Now, O Lord,

              “Do thou the gracious harvest raise,
               And thine alone shall be the praise.”

     “Feb. 25th. This evening I went to see the Roman Catholic
     chapel, a small place of about eight feet square,
     surrounded with a veranda. A dish with spices, and another
     with flour, were placed on the altar. A Padre comes
     occasionally, but he has not been here for the last two
     years; he has baptized several native women connected with
     Europeans; but I cannot find that any other natives have
     been baptized by him.

     “Feb. 27th. Yesterday and to-day, I had an opportunity of
     talking with some poor women, Portuguese Roman Catholics,
     about Jesus Christ; and found some relief to my own mind in
     recommending Him to their regard. From one I learned (what
     indeed I had heard before) that at Bettiah, situate in what
     used to be the old kingdom of Nepaul, eight days’ journey
     inland from Chuprah, all the inhabitants are Roman Catholic
     christians: a padre resides amongst them, and they have a
     church.

     “March 8th. The week has passed with little profit. I
     received a letter from dear Martyn,[32] which comforted
     me not a little. On returning from public service, I
     found some earnestness in prayer to God for my flock;
     for the Church in India; and her ministers; for my dear
     relatives; for my former flock, and all who pray for me;
     but especially for my dear country, her government, her
     ministers, her people; and for all christians. After dinner
     I called in the Bettiah-christian,[33] and found him
     intelligent, and very attentive to his padre. He gave me
     the history of the creation and fall of man, with a mixture
     of fable, and some confusion in the connexion. He seems to
     know nothing experimentally of Christ; and, if I understood
     him rightly, considers that the sin of Adam, which fell
     upon his posterity, is removed by Christ; and that now by
     attending to the sacraments we obtain pardon of sin. God
     grant me wisdom to deal prudently with him: he appears
     sincere, but not very humble.

     “March 9th. This morning I went to the hospital, in
     consequence of a message from a native woman, who is
     desirous of baptism: she appeared anxious to go in God’s
     way, as she expressed it; and with tears said, that from
     her heart she desired baptism. On my asking her whether she
     was a sinner? She replied, That before, or towards God, she
     was a sinner: but on being further questioned, confessed
     she did not know wherein she had done amiss, except it were
     in living in an unmarried state; looking wistfully at the
     man. I took occasion, from this confession, to speak of the
     evil of this circumstance, and of the only way of obtaining
     forgiveness, through the blood of Christ. She promised to
     keep this word in her heart, and to pray according to my
     directions. The man appears sensible of the evil of his
     present habits; and promises that, if the woman lives, he
     will marry her. I am at a loss how to proceed: to refuse
     her baptism will evidently be a grief to her; and I hope
     she is awakened to a sense of her sin. May the Lord direct
     me!

     “March 15th. I went yesterday evening to the barracks; and
     if circumstances had been favourable, should have married
     the persons above-mentioned; but find I should have broken
     military regulations if I had done so. To-day, the man
     seems unwilling; but the woman expressed dread at the
     thought of continuing in sin. I have observed, on several
     occasions, when explaining christian subjects through a
     native who understands English, that they [the natives]
     have a great reluctance to speak of Jesus Christ, and never
     do it till I urge it again.

     “March 17th. A letter from dear Martyn dispirits me;[34]
     as, from the dislike manifested to his schools, I may see
     how little is to be hoped for: yet we expect opposition;
     why then should I be dismayed? O my soul! hope in God!
     Notwithstanding, I have engaged a schoolmaster, and am
     waiting to see the result. I have employed myself to-day in
     translating the ten commandments into Hindoostanee, with
     the assistance of a moonshee. He could not, for a long
     time, understand why God is called a ‘jealous God.’

     “March 18th. A native woman has been with me, expressing
     her desire for baptism. I made the moonshee read to her
     the ten commandments; and could not help smiling to hear
     one Hindoo explain the law of God to another: she exhibits
     no humility. The Bettiah-christian pleased me much this
     evening: he mentioned four good works which God approved
     of; three of which I understood to be faith, love, and
     obedience to the law. I replied, that if faith was in the
     heart, all the other good works would follow; if we really
     believed the love of Christ to sinners, we must love Him
     in return. He answered, that it was true; and said, If
     faith is not in the heart, none of the other graces would
     be there. All this was said with a seriousness and gravity
     which looked very like sincerity, if it was not really so.
     A female attending the woman who has applied for baptism,
     interfering very improperly, was desired to hold her peace.
     She left the room with marks of great anger, having before
     exhibited symptoms of uneasiness; especially when the
     seventh commandment was repeated. So does Satan rage when
     his strongholds are attacked!

     “March 22nd. In conversation with Mooney Lol and Moonshee,
     on the necessity of making inquiry for ourselves in matters
     of the soul, I remarked an expression which has dwelt
     much on my mind: ‘When we have a king of our own to order
     us in the right way, we will then walk in it.’ This, with
     other circumstances, convinces me of the impolicy of the
     Government, in withholding Christianity from the natives.
     They are tasting of British liberty; but, having no
     principles to guide them, when they feel their strength,
     they will expel the British; whereas now, if missionaries
     were permitted, they would, in two generations, probably
     all embrace Christianity.

     “March 26th. This evening, after conversation with the
     native woman, I baptized her, with earnest warning not to
     trust to the outward sign. She said, She had been a sinner,
     but that she would pray to Jesus, night and day, to make
     her free from sin, and would be His slave, and serve Him
     for ever. After the service she cast her eyes up to heaven,
     and kept them fixed for some time, with an appearance of
     most ardent supplication. Afterwards I went home with
     Sergeant M’D., whose wife, though a Roman Catholic, wishes
     to communicate.

     “April 2nd. Yesterday morning I went to the barracks. I
     asked the native woman whom I lately baptized, whether she
     prayed? She answered, ‘Yes.’ ‘What do you pray to God for?’
     ‘To make me well in this world if He pleases; and if not,
     to take me to Himself.’ I endeavoured to impress on her
     the necessity of asking all in Christ’s name; which she
     seemed to attend to very diligently. The man was impressed.
     In the evening I went to bury a child; and spoke to three
     invalids, plainly and at length, on the necessity of
     winning Christ.

     “April 6th. I learned from the Moonshee that the old
     schoolmaster, in order to keep his scholars from the free
     school, circulated a report that I should send the children
     to Calcutta; which, it seems, keeps many back; but this
     notion, however, is now done away with.

     “April 8th. Yesterday the Bettiah-walla came again after an
     absence of a fortnight. He said he had been unwell; and
     his appearance bespoke it. He told me that he was poor and
     helpless without Jesus Christ. To-day he came again, and
     read, with evident interest, the fourteenth and fifteenth
     chapters of St. John; especially the promise of being one
     with God and Christ. The account of the fruitless branches
     also impressed him; and he confessed that his heart was
     backward towards God. This morning the children of the
     school came to me: I was much struck with their appearance,
     and artless manners. The Bettiah-walla received the ten
     commandments with reluctance: the second is not in his
     number. I took several occasions of pointing out to him the
     name of Jesus, as the only medium of access to God; and
     observed that we must not pray to saints. At hearing this,
     his countenance fell. O that the Lord may lead him into all
     truth!

     “April 10th, 1807. This day I have completed my thirtieth
     year. I have been reviewing my birth-day memoranda, and
     I feel quite abased. Alas! where is the blessedness I
     experienced some time back; or was I then under a mistake
     as to my real state? I suspect that much of animal feeling
     mixed with my former experience, for I think my soul is as
     fixed as ever, in knowing nothing upon earth but ‘Jesus
     Christ and him crucified.’ Yet, O my God (for mine thou
     art) search me! The Lord’s mercies to me are innumerable:
     if I should attempt to number them, they exceed the minutes
     of my existence; but alas! my heart is insensible; my
     affections are as cold as ice: I am become a stone to the
     fear of death; and the terror of the Lord, rather than
     the sweet love of Jesus Christ, seems to constrain all
     my doings. There is not a desire, I think, to keep back
     a tittle of God’s word. I even feel the time long till
     the Lord’s day returns, that I may have an opportunity of
     warning poor sinners: yet when it comes my heart is heavy;
     and I go with a kind of sullenness and desponding tardiness
     to God’s work. O that it were with me as in months past!
     The Lord has marvellously hid me from the strife of
     tongues, has wonderfully supported my feeble mind, has
     enabled me to seek the salvation of souls with a boldness
     unusual to my nature; and has given testimony to the word
     of His grace in this place. He supports me in solitude, and
     enables me to spend days alone without weariness: praised
     be His name! The undivided and glorious Trinity are worthy
     of my adoration and love. O rather let me go mourning thy
     absence to the grave than attempt to satisfy my soul with
     contemptible trash! Yet, in thy manifold mercies, let me
     taste thy love, and praise thee in the use of all that thou
     bestowest! The prosperity of Zion is my earnest desire:
     the conversion of the British and the heathen, the success
     of my preaching, schools, and private attempts [to do
     good] are the subjects of my daily prayer. O that the Lord
     would bless these feeble efforts, would perfect that which
     belongeth unto me! Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my
     soul and body: and look with humble hope to be kept by thy
     power through faith unto salvation.

     “Martyn alarms me by expressing a wish for my removal.[35]
     I feel very reluctant to it; and am enabled to resign
     myself to God in prayer, even to die here; if, in this way,
     He will be more glorified.

     “April 12th. This evening, I buried the native woman whom
     I lately baptized; and spoke to the people from 1 Cor. xv.
     33. ‘Evil communications corrupt good manners.’ O Lord,
     grant thy blessing! Let thy promise come, and then shall
     sinners in great numbers be converted unto thee!”

The following Letter to Mr. Buckworth dated May 22nd, 1807, contains
some interesting particulars of which there is no record in the
Journal:--

     “From the first of January till the beginning of this
     month, I was much affected by this climate; and did
     not begin to recover till April. Thanks to a kind
     Providence, I am now quite well; and have escaped that
     first attack on arrival, which has carried off four of my
     fellow-passengers. The effect of this climate was felt as
     severely by my mind as my body: a listlessness and languor
     rendered any little exertion a burden: even my devotion was
     for the most without life or activity; and, alas! little
     of that lively spirit I, in some poor measure, enjoyed
     in England, remains with me. I bless God who enables me
     to live on Christ as my ‘All in All’ and keeps alive in
     my heart a sense of the value of His favour, and the
     excellency of the ‘purchased possession.’ The absence of
     lively feeling I conceive to be occasioned by the want
     of ‘the communion of saints;’ and I remember, with tears
     sometimes, those days ‘when I went to the house of God with
     the multitude of those that kept holy day.’ I am very far,
     however, from being without marks of the Divine favour: I
     am enabled to spend weeks alone without weariness; and to
     find pleasure in those studies which may qualify me for
     extensive usefulness. We have here about three hundred
     Europeans, invalids, and officers; of the latter I see
     little, although we exchange mutual civilities: perhaps, I
     am not three hours in a week, on the average, in civilized
     society; though I might be much more if I chose, but find
     it my duty and privilege to avoid much visiting.

     “One Sergeant has embraced the truth in love, I trust; and
     some others are hopeful. A native, descended from Roman
     Catholic parents, has been daily with me; and we read
     the gospel in Hindoostanee together: he is a man of good
     understanding. When I found him here (February) he had
     not seen the Scriptures: he now understands much of the
     general sense of the gospels; and evidences a pleasing
     spirit of enquiry. I am not at present, however, without
     fears respecting his real conversion. Should it please
     God to work effectually in him, the blessing to his poor
     countrymen might prove incalculable. You will wonder,
     perhaps, that I do not speak with rapture on the subject
     of the conversion of the natives; be assured, dearest B.,
     no subject is nearer my heart; and this I feel assured of,
     that whilst health and strength remain, my life shall be
     devoted to the furtherance of this work, as well as the
     more immediate objects of my present appointment. The works
     of the devil are here manifest, and excite an abhorrence
     in my soul, which, by the grace of God, will to the last
     make me labour to destroy them: but the effects of my
     labours are not, according to human appearance, likely to
     be immediate. The rising generation seem to be the most
     likely subjects; and some favoured servant of Christ may,
     probably, lay my head in the dust, and enter on his labour
     here among ‘a people prepared for the Lord.’ But ‘they who
     sow and they who reap shall rejoice together’ in the day of
     our Lord’s appearing.

     “The superstition of this country is of such a complicated
     kind, that I can say nothing with certainty about it, at
     present. Almost every person has a different idol; or a
     different account of the same idol; and the objects of
     their worship are innumerable. A circumstance that took
     place yesterday morning, may help to shew you the folly of
     their worship: its wickedness, in some respects, cannot be
     named. The fort of Chunar (in which I live) is a fortified
     hill of about two miles in circumference; the ramparts
     command an extensive view on all sides, and most mornings
     I take a walk upon them before sun-rise. It seems, that
     the first founder of this fort and his tutor are both
     canonized, and are supposed to preside here still, and are
     worshipped as tutelar deities. Yesterday morning, at the
     south end, most remote from the guard-house, I found the
     firelock, turban, and sacred drinking-vessel of one of the
     sentinels: a brahmin was placed by the sentry-box, and was
     observed by me below. I passed on. As I returned, he spoke;
     but I did not stop. Thinking afterwards that he might be
     ill, I called a servant, and sent him to see. Now observe.
     He said that, at three in the morning, he had seen two
     figures of men approaching, that he challenged them, and
     that they immediately flew upon him, beat him unmercifully,
     and, after he was stripped, kicked him off the rampart,
     ten feet at least (the ramparts were certainly seven feet
     high). The Jemadar (a native officer) who, with others, was
     come to his assistance, was very angry with him, and said
     these figures were the identical founder of the fort and
     his tutor, who dwell in this part of the fort, and have
     thrown two sentinels over the parapet for interrupting
     them: this the brahmin before mentioned believed, and this
     opinion was current. I asked how this god came to beat him,
     a brahmin, so sacred a man? He readily answered, That the
     tutor is not a good, but a bad spirit; and they worship him
     to keep him from doing them injury. I said to some others,
     that it was quite plain that even a brahmin himself was
     not beyond the power of these demons; how then could they
     expect the brahmins to defend them? They were silent; but
     evidently not convinced, as they offer goats in sacrifice,
     and pour out wine in libations, which they fancy the demon
     eats and drinks. I told them not to be so profuse in their
     offerings, lest Bhyzoonát should become so wanton as to
     destroy them all.

     “A rich Brahmin told me yesterday that if any one died in
     Benares, or within ten miles of it, he would undoubtedly
     go to heaven, though he were ever so great an offender. I
     told him I would come some night and plunder his house,
     and then go to Benares, and so secure both present and
     future riches. He saw my meaning, and said with a smile,
     ‘there is no need for Sahib to take any money by force;
     my wealth is all at his feet,’ and so evaded my argument.
     I could fill volumes with conversations of this kind, but
     they have no more seeming effect than words spoken to the
     air; so deeply-rooted is error in their minds, and so
     congenial are their lying idols to the corrupt nature of
     man. I should not, however, forget the power of God, nor
     limit its operation. This I feel sure of, that the young,
     with means of instruction, will grow up ashamed of their
     idolatry; and means of instruction are not now entirely
     wanting. My three dear sons in the faith (young officers
     who were fellow-passengers) continue to walk in the truth.
     O, were the British all true Christians, the conversion of
     the heathen world, humanly speaking, would be comparatively
     an easy work! The appointment of Chaplain is, in this point
     of view, important.”

It will be recollected (p. 62), that a short time before Mr. Corrie
left Calcutta to proceed to Chunar, he had consulted with Mr. Brown
and other friends, as to the means by which they “might best promote
the glory of God in the earth,” and that among other means that were
deemed likely to contribute towards so noble an object, one was, that
each of the parties then present should forward a quarterly report of
his ministerial plans and prospects, to Mr. Brown in Calcutta; who,
having appended his own observations, should transmit a copy of the
combined reports to each individual.[36]

It was considered that a mutual knowledge of the facts and
observations which might be accumulated in the course of each other’s
labours and experience, would tend greatly to encourage and direct
them as individuals, amid the difficulties which the Missionary
and Chaplain had then to contend with. The first of these Reports
seems to have been made on the 6th of April 1807, but no copy of Mr.
Corrie’s communications is met with among his papers, of an earlier
date than the Report which is here subjoined.

                                           “Chunar, July 6, 1807.

     “The same routine of engagements and employments offers
     little of variety, either to amuse or profit my honoured
     brethren; but the idea of being under an engagement to
     communicate something on this day, has been no little spur
     to activity, that I might have something to relate to them.
     The motive I feel to be an unworthy one; but those among
     whom I am placed may have been benefited from it, and our
     plan will redound to their benefit at least.

     “My mind has at times, been sorely exercised with
     temptations to give up all exertion in the cause of Christ,
     and take my ease like those around me; more especially,
     about a fortnight since, the improbability of success,
     the sneers of the world, the dread of singularity, were
     the chief engines the enemy attacked me with, respecting
     the Europeans; respecting the Heathen, his suggestions
     were chiefly, the opposition of government, the extreme
     ignorance of the natives, the fear of commotions in the
     country, should I attempt their conversion. These, like
     fiery darts, were at different times, and in divers ways,
     cast into my soul, and grievously wounded me. I bless God,
     whose love is everlasting, that He has rebuked the tempter.
     I look back as one who has escaped shipwreck, barely with
     life; and I feel determined, through the grace of Christ,
     to count not even life dear unto myself, so that I may
     finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have
     received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the
     grace of God.

     “We have had divine service regularly every Sunday morning,
     at sun-rise, in the fort. Our commanding officer has for
     some time left off attending, though he continues very
     civil and obliging. He makes ill health an excuse; although
     he has occasionally been in the fort soon after the time
     of worship, and without any cause but his own pleasure.
     Another officer has also left off attending, although
     for some time after my first arrival, he was regularly
     among us. Some others have all along been irregular in
     their attendance, and continue to come occasionally. The
     gentleman and his wife, I alluded to in my last report,
     do not go on as I had hoped, though they are very kind,
     and my only intimate associates. Although he does not
     enter into my views, he yet talks familiarly with me on
     the subject of religion, and tells me his own views and
     feelings respecting it; which, together with their regular
     attendance on public worship, made me to hope they were
     under a divine influence. But, oh, the love of this present
     evil world, is a clog which weighs down the souls even of
     those who know more of its vanity, than these [persons] at
     present do.

     “Among the common men, I trust some good has been done,
     although little to lasting benefit, as yet. I mentioned a
     sergeant of Invalids, who joined himself to me soon after
     my arrival. He is now in the hospital, and seemingly in the
     last stage of sickness. He made a profession of godliness
     in his youth, in England, it seems. He is now greatly
     alive to the consequences of death. He is become extremely
     communicative, and in comparison of what he used to be,
     eloquent. His experience is such a lesson to backsliders,
     as makes me anxious to communicate it separately, when the
     final scene may be closed; and, therefore, I shall say
     nothing more of him here.

     “A Serjeant on the pension-list, has, since my last,
     evinced considerable concern for salvation; and is, I
     trust, in a fair way. Another Serjeant also reads, and
     assents to the books I lend him, and I am told, is somewhat
     reformed in conduct; but still is by no means a hopeful
     character.

     “The native woman whom I baptized, died and was buried,
     April 12th. The man with whom she lived, is since married,
     having expressed great concern for his former conduct,
     and thanks for my admonitions; declaring, at the same
     time, that he never before was told he was doing wrong,
     in this respect; and that, for the fifteen years he has
     been in this country, he had not seen a clergyman, to his
     knowledge, till I arrived here. Another has put away his
     native woman; and another is now desiring to be married,
     but his commanding officer refuses to give permission, on
     the score of the woman’s character.

     “No public worship as yet has been established at the
     barracks, chiefly in consequence of my health having been
     very unsettled. I am anxiously hoping to be able soon to
     have opportunity of speaking to them publicly the word of
     life. It oppresses me with grief, when I can feel as I
     ought, that many, perhaps 150, of the number of Invalids,
     seldom, or never join the public worship. The man who
     for some time has read prayers in his dwelling on Sunday
     mornings, continues to do so, being lame, and so unable
     to come up to the Fort; I fear, however, he is without
     experience of the love and grace of Christ. On Whitsunday I
     administered the Lord’s Supper to four. Thus far respecting
     the Europeans here, whom I consider myself, in a peculiar
     manner, called to attend to.

     “At Secrole, which I visited last week, I found a merchant
     of real piety, though from his relating of a vision, he is,
     in my opinion, something enthusiastic. He devotes much time
     to the relief of poor and sick natives. He, for some time,
     read prayers on Sunday mornings and evenings, to the few
     artillery-men in their barracks; till, on his imprudently
     administering medicine to a sick man, he was forbidden all
     communication with them. He, however, still reads prayers
     and a sermon, in his own house, on Sundays, and some join
     him. One artillery-man, he speaks of, as a true christian.
     He had not before met with any who could understand him,
     and had frequent thoughts of writing to Mr. Brown; but
     feared that his letter would not be welcome. He is a stiff
     churchman; and when I asked him whether he had read the
     Missionary Magazine, which I saw in his shop, he started
     at the idea, and said ‘He never had any connection with
     Dissenters.’

     “Respecting the heathen, I have instituted four schools for
     the instruction of children; two on each side the Fort. On
     either side, one for Hindoos, and one for Mussulmans. In
     one Hindoo school are thirty-seven: in the other thirteen.
     In one Mussulman school, are twenty-two; in the other
     sixteen. In all eighty-eight children. Of these a few
     now know their letters, and I am much exercised in mind
     respecting the introduction of the Scriptures among them.
     The Gooroos are quite averse to any books; it has never
     been the custom, they say, for them to read books; and the
     Mahomedans have books. I trust the Lord will guide me,
     and not suffer me to mar his work by my extreme ignorance
     of the best mode of proceeding. The nearer I approach the
     work, the greater appears its difficulty, the more I feel
     my own insufficiency. If any good is done among us, how
     evidently will it appear to be of God.

     “Not having a copy of my last report, I know not whether
     I mentioned some native Roman Catholic Christians who
     daily attended me for reading the Scriptures. Only
     one of four continues to come, and he seems to be in
     earnest. He has with great reluctance been brought to
     confess, that at least the purgatory of the Papists,
     their transubstantiation, and prayer to saints, have no
     foundation in Scripture. He has read the Gospels through;
     St. John twice, and we are now going through St. Matthew a
     second time. He has brought his wife and family to Chunar;
     and has expressed a wish to instruct his native brethren,
     if I will find him subsistence. After many expressions
     of this kind, I told him, that he must consider that the
     Company give no authority for this; that he must expect no
     more favour than others, from the British; that I would
     only support him with necessaries, but should expect
     his children would be taught to earn their bread; and
     desired him to reflect seriously on the subject, and make
     it matter of prayer to God. He has not expressed so much
     eagerness since this, as before. He, however, has much
     conversation with the native baptized persons; tells them
     faithfully of their sin and heathen practices; and I think
     is himself a true Christian. He yesterday explained to me
     the Parable of the Sower very exactly, without reference to
     our Lord’s explanation. It may not be amiss to transcribe
     a few remarks I have noted down respecting this man’s
     knowledge of divine truth. I understand him better than he
     understands me, but I enquire of him the meaning of what
     I have said, till I find he has caught the idea I wish to
     convey.

     “Saturday, May 16th. The Bettiah-walla remembered very
     exactly what I explained to him yesterday of our Lord’s
     discourse with Nicodemus; he, also, remembered very
     correctly the explanation of the allusion to the brazen
     serpent, repeating what I had told him of that transaction.
     On asking him, in what sense must we look to Christ; he
     answered, Jesus Christ is not now on the cross: but, as He
     said to Thomas, who seeing the prints of the nails in his
     hands, cried out ‘My Lord and my God,’--‘Blessed is he that
     hath not seen, and yet hath believed,’ so it is with our
     hearts that we must look to Him; and believing that He hath
     given his blood for us, and having our hearts made clean
     by His Spirit, we shall not perish, but have everlasting
     life. He explained John iii. 17. (without being asked) very
     scripturally, and evidently with a sense of its value.

     “May 18th. In the afternoon, I had pleasure in acquiring
     the Hindoostanee. On asking the Bettiah-walla what was
     meant by the declaration, ‘No man can come to me except the
     Father which hath sent me draw him;’ he answered, ‘No one
     desires to come to Christ unless God enlighten his mind,
     and dispose his heart.’ On asking him, What is meant by the
     expression, in John vi. 40. ‘Seeing the Son;’ he replied,
     ‘Seeing Him in his word, and with our hearts.’ He has
     had a conversation with a Mahomedan, who concluded with
     saying that Mahomet was the last prophet. The Bettiah-walla
     answered, ‘According to their own book Jesus is Noor-Ullah,
     i. e. the Son of God, that He died, and rose, and went
     up to heaven, and will come to judgment:’ The Mahomedan
     consented. Bettiah-walla: ‘Your prophet is sleeping, as
     you allow; whether is greatest, a sleeping or a living
     prophet?’ He allowed that the living one was the greatest,
     and promised to come again to-morrow. The Bettiah-walla
     answered to my question, ‘How it is that if any man will
     do His will he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of
     God.’ (John vii. 17.) ‘The Holy Ghost will come upon him
     and make his heart glad and holy.’”

     “On one occasion I discovered him in a fault, which he
     confessed with tears, making no attempt to conceal it, and
     I believe has not fallen into it again. It was at a time I
     perceived him to be much puffed up with his attainments,
     and would gladly have made him feel the force of the
     apostle’s words, ‘Let him that thinketh &c.’

     “My chief employment has been the study of Hindoostanee,
     in which however I have made but little progress, from
     frequent indisposition. My experience has in general been
     of a very painful kind. Accustomed to enjoy the communion
     of saints, and the comfort of their faith and love, I know
     but little, I perceive, how to live by faith. That passage
     has been the food of my soul for some time past. 2 Cor.
     i. 22. The name of Jesus has been refreshing ‘as ointment
     poured forth;’ and in this name, I doubt not finally to
     triumph.”

It may not, perhaps, be considered foreign to the purpose of these
Memoirs to relate, that the sergeant of invalids referred to in
the foregoing Report of Mr. Corrie’s proceedings, was the son of a
dissenting minister at St. Albans, and had been religiously brought
up; but that, having cast off the fear of God, he had run a sad
career of sin and intemperance, until arrested in his course by the
sickness which proved fatal to him. Many short notices occur, in
Mr. Corrie’s journal, of the sergeant’s last illness; and a fuller
account of him appeared at the time, in the Cottage Magazine. It may
suffice, therefore, to state that after the unhappy man had passed
through many alternations of terror and despair, in the fearful
expectation of a judgment to come, there was reason to believe that
he went down to the grave in hope. Respecting the Bettiah-christian
and the Mahomedan who are noticed in the Report, some further account
occurs in a letter to the Rev. J. Buckworth.

                                               “August 2nd. 1807.

     “By a letter received this day, from my sister, I learn
     the very agreeable tidings of your presentation to the
     vicarage of Dewsbury. This event takes away indeed, every
     latent hope that your lot might have been cast in India;
     but the souls of the people of Dewsbury are of equal value
     with those of Asia; and I earnestly pray that you may reap
     a rich harvest of souls as a reward of your labours among
     them....

     “But whilst I am taken up with those whose faces I have
     seen in the flesh, you are wanting to know how the work
     of the Lord prospers in India. I can only say that the
     general aspect of spiritual affairs is pleasing. Were you
     to ask particulars, I could not, perhaps, satisfactorily
     tell you why I say so; yet the progress of translation of
     the holy Scriptures, with the increased numbers of faithful
     enquirers, is surely matter of hope. I could dwell much
     on the labours of that dear servant of Christ, Martyn,
     in translating, and in exerting himself to propagate
     the knowledge of salvation among Europeans and heathen;
     but, without an intimate acquaintance with this country
     and people, much explanation would be necessary. For
     myself, the climate has so much affected me as to make the
     retrospect of my life nearly a blank: some fruit, however,
     has already appeared. Praised be He who ‘giveth the
     increase!’...

     “The native Christian I formerly mentioned, has renounced
     the errors of Popery, of his own accord, after a good deal
     of argument in favour of his old opinions. I believe him to
     be sincere, and that his heart is right with God. Sometimes
     he seems amused rather than grieved with the opposition of
     the Jews to our Lord; but this, though it gives me pain,
     is not so much to be wondered at, from the extreme want
     of reflection manifested by all the natives. I now allow
     him support for himself, wife, and two children. He is
     very ready in reproving and exhorting a class of people,
     descendants of the Portuguese, who are very numerous in
     India, and are nominal Christians. He warns them faithfully
     of the sin and folly of people called Christians, living as
     do the heathen; and, at my instance, he reads to them the
     Scriptures very frequently: so that I hope he may be made
     an instrument of good. By his means, also, a Mahomedan has
     been brought at least to doubt the divine commission of
     the lying prophet. This man now frequently comes to me. He
     has read the Sermon on the Mount (which I happily had by
     me, translated into Persian, by a Mr. Chambers, now dead)
     and manifests a very pleasing earnestness in search of
     truth. Nearly one hundred and twenty children are learning
     to read, at my expence: the circumstance of being able to
     read the Scriptures when put into their hands will be of
     no small advantage; as the custom of the son’s persisting
     in the business and steps of the father, precludes the
     multitude from ever thinking the knowledge of letters
     desirable. Indeed the character in which their sacred books
     are written is not allowed to be read by any but Brahmins.
     The written and printed characters are the same; as they
     have had no printed books till of late; so that in learning
     they have an advantage over us, as they learn to read
     and write at the same time, first making the letter with
     chalk, or in the dust, and then pronouncing it. I have had
     much pleasure at times in exercising the proficiency of
     the children. Some of them have countenances expressive
     of every good quality: the difference of the complexion
     is forgotten under the impression that ‘of one blood hath
     God made all the families of the earth.’ A small present
     delights the little fellows; and they sometimes come up to
     me with smiling faces, as I pass; and make _salaam_ with
     great appearance of attachment.

     “I have said that appearances are pleasing: you will
     conclude that I speak comparatively. Alas! I ought to weep
     day and night at the reflection, that in this small place
     there are about 10,000, souls ‘sitting in darkness and the
     shadow of death!’ O that the Lord may speedily open a door
     for the entrance of Divine light among them! I am learning
     the native language as fast as my slothful nature, and
     the unsettled state of my affairs, calling me continually
     here and there, will let me. My Moonshee can now perfectly
     understand me: and when I tell him my meaning, he points
     out the proper word. In this way, besides my reading for
     instruction, I have translated the history of Joseph; and
     also to the sixth chapter of Genesis; and have got to the
     seventh of Acts. These will soon be useless, as better
     translations will be to be had; but they are of use to the
     above-mentioned native Christian for himself, and those who
     listen to his conversation; and these exercises improve
     myself. I shall begin Persian soon (D. V.) The Hebrew
     is a key to the Arabic; and Arabic and Persian are so
     blended with the Hindoostanee, the popular language of this
     country, that without the knowledge of Arabic and Persian,
     Hindoostanee cannot be perfectly understood.

     “In order, too, to translate accurately, you know, the
     knowledge of Hebrew and Greek is necessary. You would
     be astonished at the subtilty with which the Hindoos (I
     mean learned Hindoos) argue on religious points. A rich
     man of this place one day visiting me, we entered into a
     discussion respecting one of their incarnations of the
     deity. The incarnate God, from their account, married many
     wives, had many children, &c. and when I observed that
     these things could not be the actions of God, assigning my
     reasons, &c. he readily answered, that the deity having
     taken to himself a human body, these actions were the
     actions of the man, and the godhead residing in him had
     no part in them; that I acknowledged Messiah ate, drank,
     slept &c., which were as little the actions of God, as
     those related of Krishnoo. I answered, that the body being
     the instrument of the soul, needs refreshment to support
     it in its labours; but that the body cannot accomplish
     any of its desires without the concurrence of the spirit
     that actuates it; so that this multiplying of wives, and
     other acknowledged sinful actions, would not have been
     accomplished by Krishnoo without the animating spirit. He
     at length left me, something in anger.

     “I have written this at different intervals, which may
     apologize for its blots and inaccuracies: but why should I
     make apologies to you? With what inexpressible tenderness
     does the remembrance of the sweet counsel I have taken with
     you, return at times! I can now, in my mind’s eye, view
     the roads we walked together, the houses we visited, the
     companies we frequented;--the hymns we sang together, the
     petitions we joined in at the throne of grace, are many
     of them fresh in mind; and, when I am in tolerably good
     spirits, they delight me exceedingly.

     “But, my general experience is of a more painful nature:
     doubts and temptations press hard upon me. The enervating
     effects of the climate make all my graces wither; and I go
     on rather in the spirit of sullen obstinacy than under the
     influence of the constraining love of Jesus.

     “I hope you have written to me. Think of a solitary being,
     on the top of a hill ninety feet above the level of the
     water, without a creature near to speak a word of comfort,
     or to suggest a word of advice; and you will not think an
     hour thrown away that may support and animate his soul in
     the pursuit of ‘a kingdom that cannot be moved.’”

The anniversary of the day on which Mr. Corrie arrived in Calcutta,
is marked by the following entry made in his journal,

     “September 20th, 1807. On this day of the month last year,
     I arrived in Calcutta from England. I have determined,
     through grace, to keep new-year’s-day, my birth-day,
     days of ordination, and of my arrival in India, as days
     of examination into my state and views. On reviewing the
     memoranda connected with this day, I find great cause
     for thankfulness and praise. What I proposed, in the
     first place, in coming to India, was the propagation of
     Christianity amongst the heathen. I had little idea of the
     difficulties attending this work; yet, blessed be God! I
     have not lost sight of it. Four schools will, I trust,
     prepare many for reading the word of life, when it is
     ready for distribution. The native Christian has profited
     greatly by the New Testament: he appears truly pious; and
     his desire to instruct others, whilst, I hope, it proves
     his own sincerity, will, no doubt, be beneficial to many.
     My prayers, also, have been answered as it regards this
     place. One is departed in peace: one or two others are, I
     hope, impressed; most are attentive; and favour is shewed
     me by all. I have experienced much mercy in restoration to
     health; and especially in the restoring to me the joy of
     God’s salvation; and the Lord continues to ‘defend me with
     His favour as with a shield.’ I feel in danger from the
     love of the world; yet, I hope, I shall be able to overcome
     it. I have often dedicated my all to God; and I do again
     now devote my all, especially _myself_ do I give up. I
     ought to have made greater proficiency in the Hindoostanee;
     but I trust, through the power of Christ, to be more
     assiduous for the future.”


       [30] Luke i. 79.

       [31] Rev. xi. 15; xix. 16.

       [32] See the Journals and Letters of Henry Martyn, vol.
            ii, p. 21.

       [33] Mr. Corrie relates (below, p. 73.) in what way, his
            acquaintance with this Bettiah-christian commenced.

       [34] See Journals and Letters of Henry Martyn, vol. ii.
            p. 28, 29.

       [35] On account of the effect which the heat of the
            climate seemed to be producing on Mr. Corrie’s
            health. See JOURNALS AND LETTERS OF HENRY MARTYN,
            vol. ii. p. 42.

       [36] Journals and Letters of Henry Martyn, vol. ii. p.
            41. See some of the like quarterly communications
            from Mr. Brown, printed in Wilkinson’s Sketches of
            Christianity in North India, pp. 145 and 169.




                             CHAPTER V.

                         RESIDENCE AT CHUNAR.


Although Mr. Corrie had been but a short time at Chunar, yet it
was evident that his ministerial labours there had begun to excite
attention both among Hindoos and Mahomedans. He had not, indeed,
acquired such a knowledge of the language of the country as satisfied
his earnest desire to make known among the heathen the glad tidings
of salvation, yet he had made progress in Hindoostanee sufficient to
enable him to hold important communications with the people of the
country. We accordingly find in his Journal and Letters more frequent
notices of his personal intercourse with the native population.

     “Sep. 21st. An Old Brahmin came from Benares, whom Wheatly
     told me of. He knows most of our church-catechism. He told
     me that the [answers to] two questions, those respecting
     our duty towards God, and our duty towards our neighbour,
     contained the sum of all good. For a long time he had a
     very bad opinion of the English. The Mahomedans, he said,
     do abstain from _one_ kind of meat; but the English eat
     every thing. This bad opinion was confirmed by hearing a
     gentleman, whom every person praised as a good man, in a
     great rage, using many abusive expressions to a servant
     for killing a rabbit which should not have been killed.
     But when he read the holy Scriptures, he found them pure,
     and that our practices were not consistent with them. This
     led him to ask whether I thought all the English would
     be saved? I answered, No: which startled him very much.
     ‘I greatly fear,’ said he, ‘on that account.’ ‘If I lose
     caste, and afterwards come short of heaven, I shall fail
     in both worlds.’ This he said with tears. ‘But,’ said he,
     ‘I thought it must be so, because the tenth commandment
     says, Thou shalt not covet, &c.’ and then he told me a
     story of an English collector, who took by force a little
     spot of ground that he had devoted to the reception and
     entertainment of sick travellers, when he would not sell
     it to him: which stumbled him greatly. Baptism, and the
     eating of meat, which, he says, disagrees with him, are
     the rock he appears likely to split upon. I told him the
     _truth_, and pointed it out to him from the Scriptures. The
     Lord render it effectual to his salvation! I gave him a New
     Testament, at which he expressed great surprise, saying, he
     supposed it would cost several rupees; nor did he think my
     reason (viz.) the love of God, in giving his Son for me,
     sufficiently constraining to induce me to _give away_ a
     thing of such value.

     “Sep. 27th. The Brahmin came on Tuesday; and, after many
     endeavours to evade the force of God’s word, agreed, with
     much weeping, to be baptized. I have some doubt of his
     sincerity on this point. He is gone to Calcutta.

     “Dec. 11th. Yesterday, an old Mahomedan called on me: we
     had a long conversation on religion. After some previous
     talking, he said ‘The deity is above our comprehension; we
     are blind, and speak of Him as blind men do from handling
     an elephant; each one according to his apprehension of
     the part he handles.’ I answered, ‘True; but if a man
     possessing sight were to behold the elephant, he would
     describe it properly; and we might believe his report.’
     He answered, ‘Yes.’ ‘Such,’ I replied, ‘were the prophets
     and apostles,’ &c. This led him to speak of the various
     prophets in whom, he said, we trusted. ‘Our services [said
     he] are confessedly unworthy of God, therefore there is
     need that a worthy Mediator be found, &c. one who wants
     nothing for himself, but can merit for us.’”

Agreeably to the resolution which Mr. Corrie had formed, to observe
New-year’s-day as one of several days for self-examination, we find
him observing in his journal:

     “Chunar, January 1st. 1808. I praise God who has brought
     me thus far in mercy; and I perceive a good monument of
     praise on the review of the past. My first desire, on
     last New-year’s-day, was to be enabled to be useful here;
     and I mark an answer to prayer in that I am heard with
     attention, and have evidently obtained some influence
     amongst the people. One, I believe, is gone home to Christ;
     whilst I trust, three others have entered on the narrow
     way. The Government yet prohibits attempts at conversion;
     and the kingdom of Christ, to outward appearance, has
     made but little progress in this land; but there is mercy
     vouchsafed sufficient to encourage me to pray; and there is
     still cause for prayer. The Bettiah-walla and two others
     have been raised up to me; with other hopeful appearances
     amongst the native women. I bless God for renewed health
     of body and vigour of mind; and for somewhat of increasing
     patience and diligence in the work of the ministry. With
     respect to my resolutions, I find I have visited more than
     I wished to do; but less than I might have done, and more
     than I hope to do for the future. I praise God that I am
     not so much ashamed of the Gospel of Christ as I have been;
     and that I have been enabled to preach Jesus Christ from
     house to house, in some small degree; but, I have done far
     less than I might have done: Yet, O Lord; I ought to praise
     Thee for thy mercy: Thou hast wrought all my works in me!
     I know I am a sinner; but thy grace is sufficient for me,
     and by thy grace I am what I am. The native schools have
     refused books; but I hope to establish a Christian school,
     and desire that my whole life, spirit, soul, and body, may
     be occupied in the work of the Lord.”

The quarterly report transmitted by Mr. Corrie to Mr. Brown, on the
4th of January, 1808, supplies us with an outline of the progress
of religion at Chunar up to that date; and touches upon the great
practical difficulty, inseparable from that loss of the means of
subsistence, which converts from heathenism usually have to endure.

     “Let us begin our correspondence with erecting an Ebenezer
     to our gracious Lord, who continues us in the land of the
     living, and gives us opportunities of obtaining a great
     nearness to His blissful presence, and a more exalted
     station among those who turn many to righteousness. I might
     well, in the review of the past year, dread the imputation
     of unprofitableness, but yet I perceive it a dishonour
     to the grace of our Redeemer, to disparage the smallest
     appearance of His grace in myself, or in others; and though
     I am sure I must say, ‘Lord, when saw I thee a stranger,
     &c.,’ I consider it my duty to credit the precious
     declaration spoken by our great Bishop, respecting himself
     and his διάκονοι, ‘Though Israel be not gathered, &c.’ Is.
     xliii.

     “Pursuing the plan suggested with so much propriety by our
     senior brother, I have to observe that since my last, some
     changes have taken place in our society, which seem upon
     the whole to have been for the better, as we have gained
     a captain of artillery, of great decorum of manners, both
     in public and private. Of our old members, I am persuaded
     that the seed of the word has put forth the ‘tender blade’
     in the lady and gentleman I have before alluded to; whilst
     considerable alteration in the outward conduct of another
     gentleman is noticed; but I fear, ‘one thing’ at least is
     lacking in him. By four out of the six families here, I am
     asked to say grace at dinner, which when I first arrived
     was unusual. I know not what I ought to think of this,
     knowing well that in Christ, nothing availeth but ‘faith
     that worketh by love;’ yet perhaps something is gained. The
     Lord help me to be more devoted to his glory, that I may
     not seem to countenance them in stopping short of the ‘new
     creation!’ One person is often very contemptuous towards
     me, but finds no one to join him at present. Among the
     common Europeans little but discouragement appears: only
     one seems entirely from under the dominion of outward sin.
     He is the sergeant I have mentioned, and appears a subject
     of divine grace. Several are approvers, and attendants on
     public worship, but the sad abuse of the late holy festival
     has damped my hopes respecting them.

     “The first Sunday in November, having prepared a moveable
     tabernacle, it was erected at the barracks, and divine
     service has been performed there every Sunday evening
     since. On the first few occasions forty or fifty attended,
     yesterday there were about twenty-five. These are, for the
     most part, very attentive, and a good deal of devotion
     appears among them in making the responses, &c. About
     six, perhaps, attend divine service twice a day. At the
     hospital one man seems piously affected, another humble
     and resigned; both these have been long ill and seem
     daily decaying. One, the first time I spoke expressly to
     him, declared with much earnestness, that he believed he
     had never offended his Maker; he now speaks a different
     language. One man, who was greatly alarmed during a fit of
     sickness, is, I fear, resting in a “form of godliness,”
     though his outward conduct is decent, and he comes every
     Sunday evening to join in worship with me.

     “At Benares, where I occasionally go, the pious merchant
     I have mentioned, appears much grown in ‘grace and in the
     knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, &c.’ He
     reads the service of the Church of England and a sermon
     from some author, twice every Sunday and every Wednesday
     evening, in a tent erected for that purpose. One Wednesday
     evening I officiated there among twenty-seven, who heard
     the word with much attention. One artillery-man of the
     lately arrived party, the merchant speaks of as hopeful.
     But I find that last week a restraint was laid upon the
     artillerymen from attending: I trust it will soon be
     removed.

     “Among the Company’s servants there, one known as a
     proficient in Hindoo literature, has discovered himself
     well acquainted with evangelical principles. Another
     Company’s servant seems to me one of the Lord’s secret
     ones. I trust there is among us ‘as the gleaning grapes
     when the vintage is done,’ one or two.

     “But what I have to say on personal experience will cast
     further light on the religious state of our society,
     or rather, it will cast a shade on the prospect.
     Notwithstanding these agreeable particulars already
     presented, there is little farther outward acknowledgment
     of God among us; there appears as yet no disposition to
     speak and act openly as the dependent creatures and avowed
     subjects of the Most High; so that, except now and then
     in private, I cannot give vent to those feelings which I
     find it my duty and happiness to cherish. On this account
     much of my religious exercises pass without that delight in
     God which His love and mercy demand; and my experience in
     general is that of the Psalmist, when he said, ‘my heart
     breaketh for the longing &.’ yet our state before God
     depends in no respect on frames and feelings; and though
     miserably defective still in every point, some greater
     degree of boldness for Christ in public, and something
     of resignation to labour in his vineyard though no fruit
     should appear, I acknowledge as the work of his free
     Spirit, by whom I trust to be upheld unto the end. My
     preaching since my last, has been on the following among
     other subjects, ‘God is not a man, &c.’ (Numb. xxiii. 19.)
     ‘In this was manifested, &c.’ (1 John iv. 19.) ‘How shall
     we escape, &c.’ (Heb. ii. 3.)

     “The state of the natives here has lately attracted much
     of my notice. From their long intercourse with Europeans,
     native habits are much laid aside. They are generally
     greatly addicted to drunkenness, and are proverbially
     dissolute. They are, in consequence, very little awed by
     the European christians. I am assured that they are usually
     ready to enter into personal contest with any of the
     European invalids, who may attempt to lord it over them;
     and except from those who eat the salt of the settlement,
     none of us have many tokens of respect paid us. In the four
     native schools, there are at present seventy-five scholars;
     those mentioned as reading books have left the schools from
     some cause or other, and no more books have been received.

     “The native women connected with the Europeans, have
     assembled on Tuesday evenings in the Fort, and on Friday
     evenings at the barracks. The usual numbers at both places
     is from ten to sixteen. For these much of my time has been
     taken up in translations, &c. Yesterday, in the fort, a
     congregation of nineteen attended prayers in Hindoostanee.
     I used the translation our dear brother Martyn favoured
     me with, excepting a few words altered to the dialect of
     this part of the country. On these occasions the native
     Christian, I before mentioned, is of the greatest service.
     He has acquired a tolerably accurate idea of the plan of
     salvation, and enlarges, with much evident feeling, on the
     heads I suggest from the portion of Scripture before us.
     He officiates as clerk in the Hindoostanee congregation,
     and yesterday read the lessons, and explained and applied
     them as I suggested to him. The effect of his exhortations
     lasts. This man is afflicted with an asthma, which lays
     him up now and then; but the eagerness with which he
     returns to teaching the native women, indicates, I trust,
     his heart to be right with God. Some differences took
     place in his family some time since, which disturbed me a
     good deal; but no fault has appeared in him. In a late fit
     of illness, I found he had a book of prayers, containing
     addresses to angels, &c. Several of the women have learned
     from him the Ten Commandments, the Lord’s Prayer and the
     Creed; and it excited a gleam of holy joy yesterday to
     hear several repeating these after me, and also whispering
     some of the responses. This reminds me of a school in
     which an European teaches ten children for me, some of
     them orphans, and some who are not eligible to the school
     in Calcutta. Since the establishment of evening worship,
     one of these children has repeated the Church catechism
     and some questions of Scripture History, with an accuracy
     rather surprising considering their years. These also join
     in the responses and in singing the Psalms, and increase
     the ‘Hosanna to the Son of David.’

     “Two youths, one the son of the native teacher, are on my
     premises, and read twice a day in the Hindoostanee gospel.
     One discovers no capacity whatever, nor does the word
     seem to affect him in the least. He has made considerable
     proficiency in the knowledge of the letters and reads the
     gospel without much difficulty, but can seldom at the end
     of a verse, tell the contents of it. The other discovers
     considerable quickness of apprehension, and gains knowledge
     readily; but as yet gives no evidence of any heart-work
     begun. Him I intend, if it please God, to appoint teacher
     of a school, in a short time. I know now of six children,
     the offspring of native Christians, whom I wish him to
     instruct; two children now attend him.

     “Of the women who were candidates for Baptism, one, it
     appears, is living in sin: and on my refusing to baptize
     her till the fruits of repentance [should appear] has given
     up seeking instruction. The other appears very sincere;
     she comes a considerable distance, into the Fort, twice a
     week (on Tuesdays and Sundays) and is herself, as far as I
     know, of unblemished life. But some circumstances connected
     with her daughter, has made me defer Baptism, which seems
     to afflict her; and she promises to pursue whatever line of
     conduct I may point out. The difficulty is in suggesting
     what these people are to do for an honest livelihood. I am
     already engaged in disbursements beyond what my pecuniary
     circumstances point out as prudent; and to tell them to
     trust in Providence whilst no means of subsistence appear,
     seems to savour too much of fatalism.

     “Let me, therefore, conclude with proposing to the
     consideration of my brethren, The best mode of employing
     native Christians who may be destitute of subsistence? And
     I think to ascertain this, it may be of service to enquire,
     What are the manufactures most engaged in at our different
     stations? And, perhaps, a barter might be established among
     themselves, without much of our personal interference,
     if communications were opened between them; which would
     certainly be desirable.”

In a Letter to Mr. Buckworth, written a few days later than the
preceding Report, Mr. Corrie enters more into detail respecting his
ministry among the heathen, and the method of teaching employed by
the native Christian of whom mention has so frequently been made.

     “Your welcome letter of February last reached me November
     1st: and I sat down instantly to read and answer it; and
     have filled three sheets of paper which would have been
     sent had opportunity offered; and, from your affection for
     myself, would have amused you. I find on review, however,
     they are very unsatisfactory; and must select from them
     a moderate-sized epistle. You rightly suspected that the
     climate might affect my body, and by consequence my
     spirits also; as some of my letters to you will shew; but,
     thanks to the Lord our healer, I am as well, and have been
     for some time, as at any period in my life. Mary had told
     me of your presentation to D; had it taken place before I
     left England, the pleasure of being a fellow-helper with
     you would probably have kept me there for life; but He who
     knows what is best for us has ordered it otherwise; and I
     am unspeakably content. At the same time, I little knew
     my own unsuitableness for the work I am engaged in; yet
     ‘hitherto hath the Lord helped me:’ and, though I groan
     under a sense of my shortcomings, He has not suffered me
     to go back from His sacred ways: and has, moreover, given
     of His Divine presence. These opportunities of writing
     call forth all my former feelings towards you; and I am
     conscious, that though so widely separated, we are one in
     the Lord Christ. But I must refrain, and give you some
     account of matters here.”

After having adverted to the fears of the Indian Government lest the
animosity of the natives should be excited by any attempts to convert
them to Christianity, Mr. Corrie writes:

     “I suppose we should be taken to task, were we to preach
     in the streets and highways: but other methods not less
     effectual are to be used, and less likely to produce
     popular clamour. Natives themselves may and can be
     employed, with the greatest advantage, in Evangelizing
     their brethren, whilst the Minister superintends, and
     directs and encourages. I have great reason to be thankful,
     that the Lord has raised up a native christian, born of
     Roman Catholic parents, who, from March last, has been
     daily with me; and now, having acquired a sufficient
     knowledge of the way of salvation, is daily employed in
     instructing others! A despised race, whom the Europeans
     have attached to themselves, hear him with great
     attention; and some with evident profit. He is at present
     very ill; but I trust the Lord will spare him to us, when
     more extensive plans will be engaged in.

     “At present, there are seventy-five children in my native
     schools learning to read, which will tend to undermine the
     superstructure whose basis is ignorance; and I purpose
     establishing a school for [native] Christian children,
     of whom I know now of six, and shall find more. The bulk
     of the people are wretchedly poor from their indolent
     habits, which never let them lay up for a rainy day.
     When a Mahomedan gets a little money, he usually spends
     it in debauchery; and a Hindoo works no more till it is
     gone. This is the character of the people: hence, beggars
     innumerable swarm; many truly wretched objects, who often
     make one retire with overflowing eyes, unable to supply
     them all. Of the Europeans, several are very attentive; and
     my labour is evidently not in vain, though I know only of
     one or two I can speak of with good hope. Of my three dear
     young friends, two are going on delightfully: one of these
     has lately been with a detachment against a native prince
     who refused his tribute, and saw some hot work: twelve of
     his brother officers fell on the occasion, but he received
     only a slight wound in the knee: the dear lad is much grown
     in spirituality since then; and is not without trials
     of ‘cruel mockings:’ he writes to me once a week, and I
     endeavour, by writing constantly to him, to encourage him
     to stand fast. Away from the means of grace, and without a
     single companion like-minded, he plainly stands by faith.
     The other at Madras goes on well, and has the ‘communion
     of saints’ to resort to. The third, a most affectionate,
     sensible youth, is, I fear, led captive; though not, I
     think, with his will. Oh! my heart yearns over them, in
     consideration of the many, many obstacles in their way!
     The demon that oppresses Europeans in this land, ‘goeth
     not out but by prayer and fasting.’ Example, opportunity,
     solicitation allure them to the paths of death; and few,
     alas, return from them! Those I allude to, are from
     eighteen to twenty or thereabouts; from which you will see
     at once the danger they are in.”

On the subject of missions Mr. Corrie adds:

     “The nature of missions seems little understood, even by
     those whose hearts the Lord inclines for the work, till
     they come into it. Mr. Cecil’s sermon, before the Church
     of England Missionary society,[37] of which I have only
     seen extracts, is, I think, an excellent discourse on
     this subject. The work requires the patience of a Job,
     with the prudence of an Apostle: and O, the self-denial
     required! How little I am fit for the work, my brother well
     knows; yet here, by the good providence of God, I am well
     content, and determined to count not even ‘life dear’ so
     that I may make ‘full proof of my ministry,’ and ‘finish my
     course with joy.’ I could fill sheets with conversations
     respecting religion, which I have had most days, with some
     one or other of the natives. Their duplicity makes it,
     beyond measure, difficult to know when they are convinced,
     or even silenced. The least appearance of impatience on
     my part makes them consider me angry; and not a word more
     will they argue, but yield every thing. I may say to you,
     the friend of my bosom, that my natural impatience is
     somewhat abated; and I am not conscious of having offended
     in this way often; but even what is the effect of eagerness
     and zeal, is construed into a passion, by a people whose
     highest perfection consists in restraining the feelings,
     and whose despotic government rendered disguise necessary
     to existence and peace.

     “The same submissive disposition in the people makes it
     difficult to know when I am understood; as they do not
     either acknowledge their ignorance or ask explanation. The
     dialects of the different provinces are so different as to
     make them nearly different languages.... Among the learned
     and the Mahomedans, much Persian and Arabic is introduced
     into their language, which to the Hindoo is unintelligible;
     and, it is now well known that a person who learns the
     language from books only, will not be understood by the
     bulk of the people. This I am aware of, and ask questions
     from the women above-mentioned; when I often find the
     meaning has been imperfectly, or not at all understood;
     which leads to fresh explanation. One specimen of our mode
     of proceeding, I have made a memorandum of, and which may
     amuse you:--After having read the first chapter of Genesis,
     which I translated, I suggested to this native Christian
     to enlarge upon the following heads, which he did in this
     manner, ‘Learn, first, the honour put upon man by God: He
     gave him dominion.’ ‘See,’ continued he, ‘the elephant;
     one blow of his would be instant death, yet he goes here
     and there at man’s word.’ ‘Observe the power of God: He
     commanded, and it was done, &c.’ ‘Let a man try to create
     an ant, he cannot do it; let him try to make a hair, he
     cannot do it: yet look at the hills, &c., God made them;
     and think not that He used labour: no, the word of His
     mouth was sufficient.’ I suggested, ‘How ought we then to
     fear this great God!’ He proceeded, ‘are you not afraid
     of your masters; are you not fearful to offend them lest
     they should punish you?’ This was so feeling an appeal that
     they answered, ‘Yes, yes!’ ‘O then,’ said he ‘how ought
     you to fear an infinitely powerful God! He is infinite
     in strength; and, if you sin against Him, you deserve
     infinite punishment: and think how great punishment He will
     inflict!’ One of them at this fell a weeping. I observed,
     ‘See the goodness of God in providing such comforts and
     accommodation for man in this world.’ He went on to speak
     of the greater love of God in providing a salvation
     for our souls, which he spoke of with much warmth; the
     women hanging upon his words. These occasions are often
     productive of sweet sensations to my soul: whilst yet the
     want of positive evidence of grace in them [the people so
     instructed] generally makes me to go heavily. Most days
     are devoted to close study of the native languages: the
     Hindoostanee proper I can understand, though not to speak
     it with any fluency or accuracy: and I also begin to know a
     little Persian, which is a very agreeable study. I rise at
     day-break, breakfast between seven and eight, take a slight
     repast about one, and make my principal meal when evening
     sets in. Then my mind is usually too exhausted for study,
     and sweet would be the society of some with whom I could
     talk freely of what Christ did, and said, and suffered for
     us here below. For the want of such society, very little
     of the lively feeling I enjoyed in England enters into
     my experience: yet I am conscious of some more boldness
     for Christ, and fewer deviations from His holy ways than
     before; for which I adore His free grace by which alone I
     stand. These expressions I owe to your affection, who will
     fear, perhaps, for me; lest by any means the tempter gain
     the better of me. O, that I could say this were never the
     case! Yet, though I should justly be deemed a fool for thus
     boasting to others, yet I may call upon you to rejoice with
     me that I have obtained help from the Lord thus far, and
     have a hope that I shall never be ashamed.

     “From all that has passed, I see further proof that to
     preach nearly or quite Christianity, and live as the world
     lives, is the way to popularity: to live and preach so as
     to fancy to _recommend_ Christianity to the carnal mind,
     is the way to be little esteemed: to live godly in Christ
     Jesus is the way to win souls, and to obtain friends,
     with persecution here, and with the certain expectation
     of glory hereafter. O Holy Ghost, write these truths with
     deep conviction on my mind; and let my soul know nothing on
     earth but Jesus Christ and him crucified!”

When it is considered that the labours of a native Teacher cannot
but be of great importance, even in the most effective state of
Missionary arrangements, it will not excite surprise that in
Mr. Corrie’s circumstances at Chunar, the illness of the Bettiah
Christian should occasion him anxiety. Mr. C’s journal, however,
affords pleasing evidence that the Bettiah-walla in his sickness,
found consolation in that gospel which he seems to have been
earnestly desirous of making known to his countrymen.

     “Jan. 7th. I sent off to-day a copy of the Gospels, and of
     the Morning Prayer, and Ten Commandments, to Bettiah, at
     the request of a person who is said to be the Sirdar[38]
     of the Christians there, and of whom even the padras stand
     in awe: he is represented, also, as understanding Persian,
     Portuguese, and a little Latin. I dined with Captain
     M----; after sitting silent for some time, I was induced
     by some remarks of Major General ----, to enter into a
     long argument in behalf of Christianity, as the General
     maintained Mahomedanism to be equal to Christianity: the
     argument arose from my remarking that I thought men would
     invariably be guided in their conduct respecting temporal
     affairs by their religious opinions. ‘This,’ he said,
     ‘was a great mistake, and had led to the most disastrous
     effects: that no greater misfortunes had come on mankind
     than the contentions between Christians on religious
     pretences.’ I answered, that these were not caused by
     Christianity; and Gibbon himself being judge, Christianity
     was only the pretext: and on a comparison between
     Christianity and Mahomedanism, I was enabled so to speak as
     to leave him without reply.

     “Jan. 11th. Yesterday, the Bettiah-walla was seized with
     fever. I asked him how he was, as it regarded spiritual
     things: he said, ‘Happy.’ To-day he is worse: but, in
     answer to my question, he told me, ‘that he was not afraid
     of death, but of sin.’ In the evening I took Mr. G. to
     see him, who kindly offered his services. We found him
     in danger: he told me that ‘his mind was fixed on Christ
     Jesus: who could do all things.’ ‘I am,’ said he, ‘in His
     hands;’ and, in answer to my question, he told me ‘he found
     comfort.’ I have prayed that the Lord will spare him; and I
     trust he will be continued to the Church here.

     “Jan. 17th. The Bettiah-walla better: but very low: he
     speaks of every event as proceeding from the mercy of
     Jesus. After having spoken to him of the Redeemer, I asked
     him if he remembered Christ’s words, (John iv. 13, 14.) ‘he
     that drinketh, &c.’ he took up the words and finished the
     passage, adding, with a significant expression, ‘How can I
     forget Him?’ And many other declarations were added of His
     grace and greatness.

     “Jan. 18th. Twenty-two women attended, and heard the
     history of Ishmael, with much attention. The Bettiah-walla,
     speaking of the trouble occasioned to Abraham and Sarah,
     by the strife which arose from their sin in the matter of
     Hagar, spoke so feebly, yet with such affection, of the
     love of Christ, through whom they received forgiveness, and
     through whom we too must seek forgiveness, that most of
     them wept. I could scarcely contain myself for joy. O Lord,
     make thy word effectual!

     “A Tickour woman [who was desirous of baptism] in answer to
     my questions, and without any suggestion that could lead
     to such answers, said, ‘that her heart is much employed in
     thinking of her Creator: if it were not, what could she
     expect of good either here or hereafter.’ 2ndly, ‘that God
     as Creator and Lord has a right to command us; and that
     she is disposed to obey His will in all things.’ 3rdly,
     ‘that Jesus Christ is God, who came into the world for
     us sinners, and through whom we may obtain forgiveness,
     and the favour of God.’ 4thly, ‘that in order to this, we
     must lay hold of Him with the heart, pray to Him, and beg
     forgiveness.’ 5thly, ‘that to be baptized, and not to act
     thus, must needs brings down greater evils upon us; and
     in the world to come, surely great destruction will be our
     lot, &c.:’ with much more to the same effect, in a spirit
     of seeming sincerity and earnestness.

     “Jan. 31st. 1808. On Friday evening, thirteen women
     (native) attended at the barracks. Sergeant W. told me that
     his native wife, a short time since, entered into a long
     conversation with a Brahmin, and exhorted him to forsake
     his idolatry, which he acknowledged to be unreasonable; but
     the loss of caste frightens him.

     “Saturday, [Feb. 6.] Just returned from burying a drummer’s
     wife. The Bettiah-walla explained that I was not praying
     for the dead, but that we might have grace to walk in God’s
     ways. He told them, that when the breath is gone, the soul
     is fixed in an eternal state; and that in the last day,
     the body too will be raised and partake with the soul of
     happiness or misery: [he concluded] with an exhortation (in
     which he mixed many quotations from scripture) to watch and
     pray that that day might not come upon them unawares. Many
     natives were present, who listened with deep attention;
     except one or two who laughed. At my gate I found a blind
     beggar, whom the Bettiah-walla also exhorted and who went
     away; as I have often seen the poor glad to get a rupee and
     to be off.

     “Feby. 10th. This morning a Brahmin came to me, who
     declared ‘that the Sanscrit language is not the invention
     of man, but came from Maha Deva’s[39] Bàni: that four
     genii, who remain about the size of children of eight
     years of age, hearing the sound of the drum, repeated the
     sounds, from whence, having written them, they collected
     the twenty-five letters of the alphabet. On my asking him,
     how so many letters could be collected from one sound;
     after some dispute he said, ‘Maha Deva’s Bàni was not like
     to any now in size, but at the day of judgment it will
     sound again, and strike all with horror.’ I then inquired,
     who committed this language to writing in the Shasters?
     He answered, ‘three Fakeers, to whom the four genii
     communicated it.’ On asking where they lived, he mentioned
     ‘a jungle near the hill:’ on asking where the hill was,
     he could not tell; and, after a long argument, went away
     promising to bring a map, and shew me the situation of the
     hill; ‘which, however, is beyond the snowy mountains, in
     the land of the genii.’ To this I objected, that as the
     Shasters confined the residence of the Hindoos to this
     country, the religious men would never call their own place
     of residence unholy; and, therefore, it must be in this
     land. We parted with the promise of his coming again.

     “Feb. 12th. Yesterday, the Brahmin came again; and, after
     much conversation said, ‘there is no difference in places;
     and that only the ignorant worship stones, &c., but the
     fear of popular displeasure keeps them silent.’ In the
     evening, he came again, and we had a sharp dispute, chiefly
     on the distance of places: his Shasters describe Hindoostan
     as seventy-five millions of miles long. My moonshee and the
     Brahmin had a warm argument.

     “Feb. 21st. The Tickour woman gave notice that she had
     found sponsors. On calling her, I asked her if it was the
     intention of her heart to be the slave of Jesus Christ; to
     which she replied in the affirmative, with great fervency,
     saying, ‘that it was her desire to walk in His paths
     always.’ I reminded her of what I had been reading in John
     xiv., ‘He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them,
     he it is that loveth me;’ to which she answered, ‘that
     her desire was to obey His will; that it may be well with
     her both in this life, and the next.’ She then used some
     expressions of admiration at the grace of God to sinners;
     and on my saying, that when the Bettiah-walla returned, I
     would appoint a day for baptism, she fell on the ground
     at my feet in tears, putting her hand on my shoes, and
     raised her hand to her forehead. On being asked [a few
     days afterwards] ‘why she so earnestly desired baptism;’
     she said, ‘that she might be directed in the right way;
     obtain pardon of sins and receive God’s mercy; both in
     this world and that which is to come.’ She then entered
     on a long history of her life, told me that her husband
     died and left her in poverty, that she went about begging,
     till her daughter was married, who, after much ill usage,
     was at length left destitute; and now, to her grief, is
     connected with P. ‘It was of no use,’ she said, ‘to walk in
     God’s laws, and in this way, for three or four days; or,
     in attempting to deceive me, for that God knows her heart;
     and should she attempt to deceive me, God would punish her
     both in this world, and the next.’ I left her, desiring her
     to consider whether she would cause her daughter to take
     a separate house; which is evidently a trial to her, and
     which will, in good earnest, prove her sincerity, if she
     does.”

The first anniversary of Mr. Corrie’s ministerial connexion with
Chunar is thus commemorated in his Journal:

     “It is a year to-day [Feb. 22.] since I commenced my public
     duty at Chunar; and, on considering the way in which the
     Lord hath led me during that period, I find great cause
     for thankfulness that I have not laboured in vain: some
     doors of usefulness have been opened, and some good has
     been done. Many amongst the invalids are altered for the
     better in their conduct; several of them have married,
     and two artillery-men, I would fain hope, are serious and
     impressed. Amongst the Hindoos, some, I trust, have been
     brought to the knowledge of Jesus Christ; yet, I think,
     I am not so spiritually-minded as I was before I left
     England: though, I think, I am more constantly fixed, and
     more undeviatingly aiming, at the end of my ministry; yet I
     fear that the warmth of spiritual affection is gone; but I
     will ‘do again my first works.’ O thou whom my soul loveth,
     grant me that ‘gold, white raiment, and aye salve,’ which
     thou hast in store for needy creatures; heal me for thy
     mercies’ sake!”

It has been already stated that the Europeans at Secrole were
regarded by Mr. Corrie as part of his ministerial charge; but as
Secrole was a kind of suburb to Benares, he was necessarily brought
into contact with the Hindoos resident in and about that ‘very
citadel of Idolatry.’ Hitherto, however, it does not appear that any
opportunity had occurred to Mr. C. for seeing much of the native
city. Under date, therefore, of March 2, 1808, he writes:

     “Yesterday morning, desiring to see Benares, I went down
     the Ganges in a small boat; but was greatly disappointed
     at the appearance of the city, which stands entirely on
     the west side of the river. One place, the residence of
     Badshahzada, has the appearance of ruined magnificence;
     and several ghauts are extensive and laboured monuments
     of superstition: but the smallness of dimensions of the
     buildings around makes them appear nothing, to an European.
     Amidst them all, I came to the British flag, flying at the
     Ghaut Mangees stairs, which excited grateful sensations.
     Idolatry is plainly on the decay. Our boat line getting
     entangled with another boat, much abuse was bestowed on the
     Feringhee.”

Mr. Corrie relates, that on this occasion he preached to some
natives of Benares, as well as gave instruction to the European
soldiery. Three weeks later than this visit he was called upon to
baptize a Brahmin, who after many strugglings of conscience had been
strengthened by the grace of God to ‘confess the faith of Christ
crucified.’ An account of this event is given by Mr. C. in a letter
to his father, dated March 25, 1808.[40]

     “I have to tell you of the baptism of a Brahmin at Benares,
     on Wednesday last, when I was down there, which will
     gratify you much. You must remember that he understands
     enough of English for common purposes; and most of our
     conversation was in English. He came to me in September
     last, as I wrote to some of you; he had before been
     seeking after truth; and a pious merchant at Benares had
     given him a Book of Common Prayer: this was the chief
     instrument in his conversion. The two answers respecting
     ‘our duty towards God and our duty towards our neighbour’
     struck him forcibly; and he learned many of the prayers,
     and much of the catechism by heart. He was, however,
     greatly averse to baptism in September, and argued that
     he could serve God in private, and even promote His
     cause more, whilst he refrained from the open profession
     of Christianity. I pointed out from Mark xvi. 16, and
     John iii. the necessity of attending to ‘the outward and
     visible sign, as well as the inward and spiritual grace,’
     if we would ‘make our calling and election sure.’ He
     left me with tears, acknowledging that I spoke truth;
     but absented himself until January last, when he again
     went to the pious merchant, saying he had been very ill,
     and now found that none but Jesus Christ could save him:
     he would, therefore, give up all for Christ. After much
     intercourse, on Tuesday last I asked him, ‘Are you willing
     to be baptized?’ Answer, ‘Yes, I have no other Lord, no
     other Saviour, but Jesus Christ: He is God, and my God.’
     What makes you think Him God? Answer,--‘Why, Sahib, I don’t
     know how many times I may have been in the world before,
     or whether born at all, or not, before this time; but I
     have continued a great sinner still, (the Hindoos believe
     in the metempsychosis,) a very great sinner, I believe: I
     went to Juggernaut and here to Benares, and here and there
     (mentioning other places) to poojah (worship;) but I was
     still very bad, Sahib, very great sinner. When I found no
     good among Hindoos’ worship, I went to Musselmans,’ to
     Lucknow, (mentioning a great mahomedan doctor there,) to
     enquire; but found no good in Musselmans’ religion; but
     all bad, very bad. Then I met with the ten commandments,
     and these two, my duty towards God, and my duty towards
     my neighbour: this my heart say good, very good: this is
     Jesus Christ’s word, and I pray to Him for His grace, and
     He gave me understanding: now I know the true God; my
     heart love His word; and I no more love sin, or bad way;
     therefore, I know Jesus Christ is God,’ with more to the
     same effect. (You will perceive that if men set themselves
     to seek Christ in this way, we should have no Arians or
     Socinians.) I then asked, What do you think will be after
     death? Answer, ‘I shall go to God; what else, Sahib? Now
     He has given me grace, I am all light within: will He put
     light with darkness again? No, I shall go to God after
     death.’ Will you forsake your family and friends? Answer,
     ‘My father, Sahib, very old: he wash in Ganges, and make
     poojah: I cannot help him, but I will love him, I will
     honour him, as Jesus Christ’s word is: O! I cannot help
     him, but I will make prayer for him: I must follow my Lord
     Christ; there is no Saviour but He: Hindoos, Musselmans,
     all worship devils,’ with more to that effect--adding
     ‘Ever since I was with you, Sahib, my heart was full, and
     now, if you please, I will be baptized.’ After prayer, we
     separated: next day when he came to me, I asked him, ‘Have
     you thought much of the matter, and are you willing to
     forsake all for Christ?’ He answered, ‘I have made much
     prayer to God for His grace; and now I will forsake all for
     my Lord Christ: you will pray, Sahib, that He will wash
     me, and make me clean: you will mention before Him for the
     old sinner, a very great sinner, an old rogue, very bad,
     very bad sinner; that He will save me, and give me grace,
     that I may love Him with all my heart. I cannot keep His
     commandments without his grace; but I will pray always, and
     love Him, and cleave to Him (laying hold of his own garment
     with eagerness;) and, I will always speak truth, and take
     care of my words.’ All this with the expressive action of
     the natives, who have more action than even the French in
     conversation. At the time of administering the sacrament
     of baptism, he made the responses from the Book of Common
     Prayer, with much feeling: when addressed in the service,
     he shewed the most lively attention, and was very earnest
     in the prayers: after the service, he shook hands with all
     present, expressed with tears his thankfulness to God for
     his mercy to so great a sinner; and said he would serve Him
     for ever, and devote all his time to learning His word more
     perfectly that he might instruct others.”

Although there was much to comfort and encourage Mr. Corrie in this
manifest example of the power of divine grace, in the conversion of
this Brahmin; yet by an entry in his journal, dated March 31st, we
find him complaining:--

     “I have for several days laboured under sad spiritual
     decay; and have been dreadfully oppressed with the fear of
     man; and very backward to every good word and work. When
     the Brahmin consented to be baptized on Tuesday, the enemy
     raised an alarm in my mind respecting what the effect might
     be; tumults among the natives; anger on the part of the
     Europeans; removal by the government: these suggestions
     greatly distracted me: and I got me to my Lord right
     humbly, who mercifully delivered me from all these fears;
     and all these difficulties vanished; yet, at the time, I
     felt none of that joy or gratitude I ought, on account of
     the triumph of the cross.”

The Journal proceeds:

     “April 10th, 1808. To-day I am thirty-one years of age. I
     praise God that I am in the land of prayer; I have been
     praying for a right spirit of self-examination. It strikes
     me as remarkable in my experience, that although I could
     be always on my knees, I am usually straitened, perplexed,
     and confused in prayer: wandering thoughts perplex me
     beyond measure; and my imagination is wild and troubled,
     yet without order, even in vainly flying from one scene to
     another, and musing on the greatest improbabilities. My
     mind is, through grace, settled and grounded in the ways
     of Christ; and, I am persuaded that I shall never leave
     the heavenly way, because the Lord will keep me in fear
     of forsaking it. I have no enjoyment in worldly company,
     or amusements; otherwise, I have nothing of _assurance_,
     as I have understood it: and though I consent to every
     tittle stated in our 17th Article, it works nothing of
     ‘unclean living or presumption.’ It does, however, preserve
     me from despair; for, I never should be delivered but by
     the Spirit of Christ: nor, could I hope that His gracious
     influence would be granted to my prayers, were it not
     for the unconditional, covenanted, love of God in Christ
     Jesus. I have many short, but sweet, visits of heavenly
     grace. My soul is frequently melted down in praise, for
     the Divine condescension towards me; but little of abiding
     joy, or realizing faith, stays with me. I find ‘the work
     of righteousness’ to be ‘peace.’ More of my time has been
     employed for God, than I could once have thought possible
     to give; yet few days pass that my soul is not overwhelmed
     with a sense of short-coming: hence, Thou, O Christ, art
     all I want!

     “We have had some slight awakenings here (Chunar) during
     the past year: one in August; but it is, I fear, come
     to nothing, except H. who may have found mercy of the
     Lord: the others have turned backward, and ----, died in
     consequence of intoxication. At present a greater enquiry
     is excited than ever: three are come out (from the world)
     and several are anxiously concerned. ‘The Lord knoweth them
     that are His.’ Now, my soul, look to it lest thou let any
     of those things ‘slip’ which thou hast heard and learned
     of Jesus. O, for a spirit of grace and supplication: for
     ‘good understanding in the ways of godliness.’ O, for
     the conversion of souls! Lord, hear me in these matters:
     prosper thy work; let thine own kingdom come. Bless my
     country, my family, my friends: and, O, accept a poor worm
     who offers himself unto Thee. Take me, as thy dear-bought
     purchase; and secure me unto thyself. Let my life bring
     glory to thy name; and my death bear testimony to Thy
     faithfulness and truth: let me live, and die to Christ
     Jesus, Amen!

     “In the afternoon, I baptized the Tickour woman, by the
     name of ‘Mary.’ Satan continues to mar my comfort; though
     he cannot, through the grace of Christ, prevent the word of
     God. When I baptized the Brahmin, he raised in my mind such
     a fear of the anger of those in power as almost drove me
     to my wits’ end: but now I see that all was over-ruled for
     good, in order to prevent my overweening conceit of myself
     in this matter.”

It will have been observed, that Mr. Corrie not unfrequently
complained of the loss of health. The cause might no doubt be traced
to his want of due regard to the trying nature of the climate of
India to an European constitution. Repeated notices occur, therefore,
in Mr. C.’s Journal and Letters, of a languor and general debility
which threatened to lay him altogether aside from duty, if not to
render it necessary for him to quit the country. At this time,
however, a material change for the better seems to have taken place
in his health; for in writing to his father under date of April, 20,
1808. Mr. C. remarks,

     “A gracious Providence who has followed us with goodness
     and mercy all our days, has prospered me thus far. You
     will bless God with me, who upholds me in perfect health
     ... a most surprising change seems to have passed upon my
     constitution, so that I feel very little inconvenience
     from the heat. Last year I was obliged to have recourse
     to medicine to keep me from fainting; now, though the
     hot winds have been blowing some weeks, I feel active
     and cheerful as when with you. A sigh of regret at our
     separation often, indeed, interrupts my joys, and sends
     me with tears not unfrequently to your Father and my
     Father, to your God and my God. O, praise to a precious
     Redeemer, through whose love and grace so lasting an union
     has been brought about, which swallows up even natural
     ties, or rather rivets them by an indissoluble bond! All
     painful idea of separation and distance is lost in the
     consideration of that better country, where we shall meet
     to part no more for ever!

     “You will rejoice to hear that the word of God is
     not without increasing witness among the soldiers.
     Eighteen attended the sacrament of the Lord’s supper
     on Easter-day, most of whom are serious and attentive;
     and many are regular at our evening worship, where
     they attend voluntarily. Among their wives also great
     attention continues to be paid; and knowledge, at least,
     is increased. The Brahmin whom I baptized came up (from
     Benares) last Sunday; and after attending worship in
     Hindoostanee, expressed much delight. He proposed, as
     a doubt, what would once have been an article of faith
     with him:--‘Sahib, you have been so little while in this
     country, and [yet] know the language so well, I think you
     must have been a Hindoo before you were born in England,
     and, therefore, your fresh language came to you so quick
     again.’ A fortnight since, I baptized a woman, who is
     evidently seeking sincerely the kingdom of God. Yesterday,
     she expressed her gratitude for instruction, by saying,
     ‘I am a poor woman, and have nothing to offer to Sahib in
     return for his favour, except three fowls which I shall
     send to-morrow, if he will please to accept them.’ On
     my saying, God has given me plenty, she said, ‘True,’
     but it is my duty to lay my neck beneath Sahib’s feet.’
     The language of the common people is, indeed, full of
     compliment; but none of them show a disposition to give
     any thing away, except in some instances where grace seems
     to open their hearts. Another, the wife of an European,
     who seems the best Christian of them all, on my noticing a
     little dog, sent it to me next day, begging my acceptance
     of it. To excuse myself, I said it was too young, and she
     is now keeping it for my sister, and takes great pains in
     teaching it to beg, &c. that my sister may be amused with
     it when she arrives.”


                      TO THE REV. J. BUCKWORTH.

                                                 “April 25, 1808.

     “The heat of the climate induces a despondency entirely
     unknown to you. I perceive plainly that this despondency
     not a little infected my mind most of the last hot weather;
     which was, perhaps, increased by continued ill health. I
     have been enabled, however, to hold fast my integrity; nor
     ever have handled the word of God deceitfully; nor has the
     word been without witness. A great increase is now made
     to my evening congregations, which are my only joy, they
     coming voluntarily; and on Wednesday next, I begin a weekly
     lecture.... I am, through mercy, now in perfect health,
     and usual spirits; and see it ‘good for me to have been in
     trouble.’ My present mode of passing my time will give you,
     perhaps, pleasure, certainly amusement. On an average I do
     not dine from home above once a week, and seldom see any of
     my equals here, except a family, who, I hope, are pious,
     though their progress is slow. From morning (five o’clock
     till eight) I attend to my own private affairs, with a
     little exercise: then till three or four, learn the native
     languages; when every day, either some of the natives come
     to me to read the Scriptures, or I attend some place of
     meeting for that purpose. Mr. Martyn writes to me weekly:
     he is preparing a copy of the gospels in Hindoostanee for
     the press; this will be an invaluable acquisition: the
     one we have is so learned as to be unintelligible to the
     vulgar for the most part. I have altered [the version of]
     St. John’s Gospel which we use. The Acts of the Apostles
     especially delight the native teacher: I have told you of
     ----; you would be surprised to see the effect it has upon
     him; and the eagerness by which it is heard by others.
     I feel it to be too little regarded by myself, and am
     too apt to consider the divine manna a common thing. I
     send my father by these ships the history of a Brahmin’s
     conversion, whom I lately baptised.[41] I baptized a woman
     a fortnight since; and several of the soldiers’ native
     wives. Sinners are plainly under good impressions; but, Oh!
     the patience and perseverance necessary to deal with them!

     “Dr. Buchanan is on his way home: whatever he may publish
     will give you a true and clear insight into religious
     affairs here; except that you can have no idea of the
     magnitude of the work of conversion, unless you were here.”

In the Journal, Mr. Corrie relates

     “May 14th. Yesterday morning, I went to Wheatley’s
     hospital. The Dhobee[42] only seems truly in earnest: he
     said that since he first heard the word, his heart had been
     much taken with it; that the more he hears it, the more he
     esteems it; and that he is happy in it. ‘Jesus Christ,’ he
     says, ‘is the creator and preserver of all things, who will
     take him to God’s presence; or if not, His will be done:
     yet he will serve Him; and has forsaken Satan’s works, and
     will return to them no more. Satan’s works are worshipping
     stones, poojah, &c. &c.’ Here one of the bystanders said,
     ‘Satan’s works are also lying, stealing, &c. &c.’ To-night
     Anselmo[43] is ill. On my speaking to him, he said,
     ‘Whether well or ill, I am always begging for pardon of sin
     from Jesus Christ: I am not deserving of it, but am worthy
     of hell; yet, as He died for sinners, God for His sake will
     hear me: this is my constant hope; but now, indeed, I need
     more grace and support.’--Praise God for these things. O
     for patience and perseverance in the Lord’s work!

     “SECROLE. July 25th. According to leave obtained, and
     notice given, I came down on Friday evening with the view
     to perform divine service yesterday. On Saturday morning,
     I waited on the general, who received me with the most
     chilling coolness. He told me that he had nothing to do
     with divine service, or the artillery-men; and that he
     should not interfere: he had heard nothing of divine
     service, except from my application. Mr. ----, who had been
     forward for my coming down, on hearing of my arrival flew
     quite off, and said, ‘they could do as well now as before,
     without divine service,’ he, however, came yesterday
     morning. A congregation of at least sixty assembled; and
     after service, Mr. A. thanked me, and said he hoped they
     should give me encouragement to come amongst them oftener.
     Afterwards, the Brigade Major came with a message from
     the general, (who did not come to church) saying, that
     I was ‘at liberty to come and go as I pleased, but the
     artillery-men and officers could not be permitted to attend
     so far from the lines, for fear of the natives seizing the
     guns whilst they were at a distance: if the court-house
     were used to assemble in, or a place of worship erected
     near the lines, he should have no objection; but all
     this was to be kept a secret.’ Well: blessed be God, who
     hath opened a door here for His word! Had there been no
     obstacles thrown in the way, it would have been unusual.
     Satan never yet freely and without a struggle, resigned
     his dominion. O Lord, I have no might or skill to resist
     this great enemy; neither know I what to do; but mine eyes
     are towards thee! In the morning service, I was sadly
     amazed by the presence of so many of the great ones of the
     earth; but after the service commenced, these feelings
     vanished.

     “Aug. 24th. On Monday I went to Mirzapore, where I saw an
     old Fakeer, the most wretched victim of superstition I have
     met with. He has been a great traveller, and by the strange
     noises he utters, and the inhuman appearance he puts on,
     causes the people to take him for some great one. He struck
     me as strongly under Satanic influence. I endeavoured
     to gain from him some idea of his creed; but could not.
     Narsingha, who is celebrated in the Bhagavat Geeta,[44] is
     his titular deity, whom he considers equal to the other
     gods. I am confounded at the thought that, from the conduct
     of the English present, I was prevented warning him as I
     ought of his danger.

     “Aug. 31st. Yesterday was spent at Ghazeepore; much talk
     about religion, and religious people; but little religious
     conversation. In prayer, I have been sometimes enabled to
     make my ‘requests known with thanksgiving;’ but have felt
     great backwardness to the public services of the Church.
     ‘Lord, be merciful to me a sinner!’ for that I suffered the
     rain to prevent me from going to the evening worship; and
     that when I have spoken unto the men, it has been in a cold
     and indifferent manner! I see in Robinson[45] of Cambridge
     (whose life I read yesterday) how far a person, and even a
     minister of religion may go, and yet be as ‘sounding brass
     or a tinkling symbol.’”


       [37] Printed in the Proceedings of that Society, vol. i.
            p. 179, and seq.

       [38] Head.

       [39] The Chief Deity.

       [40] The substance of this account was afterwards printed
            in the Missionary Register, vol. i. p. 317, and seq.

       [41] See above pp. 110, &c.

       [42] A Native washerman.

       [43] Formerly a Roman Catholic. See below p. 125.

       [44] A poetical Exposition of the doctrines of a
            particular school of Hindoo Theology. It forms
            an Episode in the Maha Bharat, one of the great
            Hindoo Poems, and has been translated by Wilkins.
            An abstract of it is given in the Quarterly Review,
            Vol. 45.

       [45] An Anabaptist preacher, celebrated in his day for
            his extreme opinions, both as respected politics and
            religion; who, after having written a ‘Plea for the
            Divinity of Christ,’ rejected Christianity and died
            a Socinian.




                             CHAPTER VI.

              VISIT TO CALCUTTA--ARRIVAL OF HIS SISTER.


In the beginning of September 1808, Mr. Corrie left Chunar, for
the purpose of meeting his sister at Calcutta on her expected
arrival from England; and on his way thither he spent some weeks
with Mr. Martyn, at Dinapore. Several foreboding expressions occur
in Mr. Corrie’s Journal respecting the possible termination of the
unsatisfactory state of health in which he found Mr. Martyn. With
the purpose, therefore, of relieving that excellent person from the
pressure of clerical duty, Mr. C. remained longer at Dinapore than he
had at first intended. Of Mr. Martyn, also, he writes,

     “He entertains the opinion that he shall die before long;
     and desired me to tell Mr. Brown that should he die before
     my return, he trusted he is in the Lord, and happy. He
     wishes, if it please God, to be spared on account of the
     translations, but with great earnestness he said, ‘I wish
     to have my whole soul swallowed up in the will of God.’
     He then observed, ‘When I look back, I see nothing that
     affords me satisfaction: all my consolation flows from the
     free grace that is in Christ Jesus:--that grace which is
     now offered to-day, this is alone what comforts my soul.’”

Considering the brotherly affection that subsisted between the two
friends, it cannot be a matter of surprise, that when, under these
circumstances, the time for parting approached, Mr. C. should have
experienced some depression of spirits.

     “This morning,” he writes, “was a mournful time with me.
     I could scarcely express myself from the acuteness of my
     feelings, but tried to suppress them. I have no idea,
     however, but that I shall meet him again, if I am spared to
     return; but O! let me not boast of to-morrow, but learn to
     die daily.”

When Mr. Corrie reached Calcutta, his joy on meeting a beloved sister
was somewhat modified by the intelligence which she brought that one
of his letters[46] had been printed in an English periodical. The
distress and alarm which this circumstance occasioned Mr. Corrie will
be readily accounted for, when it is recollected that a violent dread
of Missionary operations in India, had at that time taken possession
of the minds of many influential persons, and that a motion had even
been submitted to the Court of East India proprietors for expelling
from India, all the Christian Missionaries who were then labouring
there; and for preventing the circulation of the Scriptures in any of
the languages of the East. Nothing could be more probable, therefore,
than that the publication of any accounts of Mr. Corrie’s labours
among the heathen, would draw down upon him the displeasure of the
Indian government. That such, at least, was the persuasion of Mr. C.
is plain enough, for in announcing to a relative, the safe arrival of
his sister in Calcutta, he adds:--

     “I received little of painful intelligence [by her] except
     the news of my letter to Buckworth being published. I trust
     he has not published any more of them. I cannot write to
     him just yet on the subject, lest I should say something
     that might wound his feelings: he has caused me more grief
     than any event of late has caused me.”

Soon afterwards he more fully expressed his apprehensions in a letter
to Mr. Buckworth himself.

     “I heard some time since by a friend, that ‘a letter from
     one of the Bengal chaplains who came out in 1806,’ had been
     published, and in the then state of the court of India
     Directors towards the evangelization of this country,
     might be of great detriment. Mary afterwards brought me
     word who the offending chaplain is, and who the friend is
     that has published his letters. I confess that for a time
     I felt myself wounded in the house of friendship. In the
     eyes of the world, pride told me that my character would
     suffer; and I still expect to see myself caricatured by
     the Edinburgh Reviewers, or by some such enemies to all
     serious acknowledgment of God. My brother will say, what is
     character &c., to being useful to the cause of the gospel?
     And so say I, if loss of character stand in competition
     with that cause; but really I am sure there must in my
     scrawls, written in the fulness of my heart, be ample
     matter for criticism; and truly the gospel needs not such
     a sorry assistant; especially if the publication should
     operate either to my recal, or to restrictions being laid
     upon me here. So well assured am I, however, of the purity
     of my much-loved friend in his motives for thus sending
     me into the world as an author, that I shall love the rod
     even that smites me by his hand: and he will rejoice that
     I stand ready to glory in the cross of Christ, and count
     myself honoured, if thought worthy to suffer shame for
     His sake. I hope you have not sent any more of my letters
     to the Christian Guardian; and that if you judge any
     description of the people or customs, &c. interesting, you
     will give it as an extract, and without my name and place
     of abode, further than India. I must absolutely forbid
     you to publish what I am doing. Let the great day of the
     Lord make that manifest. I am sure I shall be found an
     unprofitable servant, and ‘this shall be my only plea, that
     Jesus lived and died for me.’”

During the whole of Mr. Corrie’s stay in Calcutta he took up his
abode with the Rev. David Brown, from whose counsel and directions
he seems to have derived at all times the greatest advantage. To the
relative referred to above, he writes on this occasion;--

     “We are now under the roof of Mr. Brown. I cannot tell you
     how much we are indebted to this man of God: he has been,
     and is to us younger chaplains, a father in Israel. His
     affection for us exceeds the affection of most fathers for
     their children. His letters convey the instructions of a
     Bishop, with the tenderness of a brother. I trust we feel
     his worth and value it aright.”

Yet Mr. Corrie’s anxiety to get back again to his people at Chunar,
did not allow him to remain long in Calcutta. In the letter just now
quoted he observes:--

     “My few sheep are in the wilderness without a shepherd, and
     some of whom I hoped better things I hear are gone astray:
     these thoughts make every place strange to me except
     Chunar. There is no one thing on earth worth living for,
     but to be employed in our blessed master’s service, to be
     ministering in obedience to His will to the spiritual and
     temporal good of mankind. When my soul ceases to labour
     after this, life will be no blessing to me. How precious
     the idea that saints are kept by the power of God! This is
     the ground on which I build my hope, of perseverance to
     the end; and I know whom I have believed. He who has given
     me to know the name of Christ, and to trust therein, will
     enable me to draw out all the virtues contained in that
     precious name to support me under temptation, and to enable
     me to holiness of living.”

Owing, however, to the tedious nature of the passage up the Ganges,
Mr. C. did not reach Chunar till the middle of January 1809. On his
way, he spent a week with Mr. Martyn at Dinapore, and preached there
on Christmas-day 1808. On the following New year’s day, he placed on
record his recollections of the past year:--

     “Chuprah; on the way back from Calcutta to Chunar. Sunday,
     Jan. 1st. 1809. I desire to review this year past, as in
     God’s presence, and to note down His dealings, as I shall
     give account at the judgment-seat of Christ.

     “First, let me note His mercies _ministerial_, in the
     success of my labours at Chunar; where a society of
     fourteen are united in the ways of God; second, _personal_,
     in the preservation of life, and the vouchsafing of
     excellent health; the bringing my sister, who is now with
     me, and promises to be indeed a helpmeet for me. Third,
     _spiritual_, inasmuch as the Holy Spirit is not withdrawn
     from me; nor has the purpose of living only to God forsaken
     me: I see that nothing is worth living for, but to live
     to God. I determine, the Lord being my helper, to live
     to no other purpose.... I am not so watchful of myself
     as formerly; but I renew my purposes, would do my first
     works, and go on unto perfection. I seem, as far as I know
     myself, kept from the love of wealth; but this is, in some
     degree at least, from lavishness, which hurries me often
     into the other extreme: against this, too, do I resolve;
     and would use this world’s goods as one that must give an
     account. The work of the Lord among the heathen shall be
     attended to, with fresh vigour. I can say nothing of the
     Hindoostanees at Chunar, nor of the Schools; but I hope to
     do more for them than ever. O Lord, let past mercies be
     remembered, as a constraining motive to future exertion;
     and, whilst I would mourn for my sins and short-coming, O
     keep me in time to come for Christ’s sake. Amen.”

Under the date of Chunar, Jan. 24, 1809, he writes,

     “Have been at home ten days, and I trust have not been
     quite forgetful of the goodness of God, in taking me out
     and bringing me back in safety: but I feel and deplore my
     hard heartedness and corruption. On Sunday week resumed
     duty at Secrole, twenty attended. Here, on Sunday last,
     five services have renewed something of my former pain in
     the breast. But, alas! my labours seem all to have been in
     vain. Not one seems to have stood his ground. My heart is
     greatly cast down, and would fain shrink from any further
     trial. Self and worldliness combine to dishearten me from
     the work of the Lord. O Lord, leave me not, but revive thy
     work in me for Jesus’ sake! Amen.”

In a letter addressed to Mr. Buckworth on the 8th. of Feb; Mr. C.
gives utterance to similar feelings of discomfort:--

     “Notwithstanding the many objects new to you, with which I
     am surrounded, I scarce know what to write to you about: it
     is a time of great spiritual dulness with me; and, owing
     to the indisposition of the native teacher, the great work
     we have chiefly at heart seems at a stand. My strength is
     laid out, in the mean time, among the European soldiers;
     and, alas, to little seeming purpose ... I am ready to be
     weary of what appears so hopeless a task as the turning
     of men, so incorrigible, from the error of their ways:
     these workings of my mind are too glaringly impious to
     escape even my half-awakened perception, and the greatest
     of all opposition I find to spring from my desperately
     wicked heart: I trust something of self-abasement, for this
     horribly rebellious spirit, exists at the same time.

     “You know all the controversy that has arisen at home
     respecting missions to this country:[47] there is no
     knowing what the end of such opposition to Christ’s kingdom
     will be. We have been in expectation of a visit from the
     French over land. The late events in Spain may be the means
     of keeping us longer quiet here. The French would perhaps
     have established their system of worship where they could
     have got footing; and any mode of Christianity would have
     been preferable to the idolatry and superstition that
     overwhelms this unhappy land. My principal employment now
     is with a school of Christian native children, five in
     number: some of them read easily the Holy Scriptures in
     Hindoostanee; and a gleam of joy sometimes enlivens my mind
     while hearing them.

     “Feb. 15th. Since writing the above, the old native
     Christian has been enabled to renew his labours; and
     another christian child is come to school. I have had
     one of those sudden attacks you happily know little of
     in England; it has not yet left me; but my times are in
     God’s hand. I find it is good to be afflicted: my soul
     returns unto her rest; and, I bless God for a desire only
     to know and glorify Him: this I think I can say is all in
     all with me. You will have heard of the Roman-catholic
     mission established in this country. My Catechist is a
     fruit of this mission; and four men and four children in
     my employ besides. They are natives of Bettiah in the
     kingdom of Nepaul, i. e., the old kingdom of Nepaul; for
     now the British posterity of Japheth are dwelling in almost
     every corner of the tents of these sons of Shem; and the
     old limits of most of the states of this country are in
     consequence altered.

     “One man from the same place passed the whole of your
     summer with me here; and daily read the Scripture with me;
     in which he seems to be taught of God. On returning last
     September, he withstood the Missionary (an Italian) to his
     face, respecting the praying to saints, bowing to images
     &c.: he was, in consequence, excommunicated; and, on being
     taken ill soon afterwards was beset by two agents of the
     missionary, who sounded threatenings of hell, &c., in his
     ears; and declared his body should be cast on the dunghill.
     Distressed, it seems he paid a fine to be restored to the
     Church, and soon after died. In his last days, he begged
     some one of his relations to convey his thanks to me,
     and to commend his children to me. The message is come,
     and the unfeigned tears of these few Christians here on
     learning the end of Anselmo, were a striking proof of the
     sympathizing spirit induced by Christianity, compared
     with the hard and unfeeling spirit of the heathen. On the
     map of Hindoostan you see the country of the Seiks; their
     capital is Lahore. The state consists of a number of
     independent chiefs, under a nominal head; many of these
     chiefs have sought our aid against the oppression of their
     head; and, as the country they inhabit lies in route of any
     overland invading army, we have sent a force in aid of the
     petitioners. Two of my young friends (very dear to me in
     our common Lord) are with this force. The principal matter
     of interest to us in this expedition is, that these Seiks
     are, as a nation, Deists.[48] Much superstition, indeed, is
     among them; but they are neither Hindoos nor Mussulmans;
     and profess themselves worshippers of one invisible God.
     Such a state of mind seems favourable to a reception of
     Christianity; and, may we not hope our intercourse among
     them may be the means of bringing them acquainted with that
     only name whereby they must be saved? Martyn is going on,
     in company with the converted Arabian,[49] in translating
     the Scriptures into Persian. I have seen the Edinburgh
     Reviewer’s remarks on the Missionaries[50] and critique
     on their Journals. It is to be regretted, perhaps, that
     in some expressions they are open to ridicule; but it is
     a subject of gratification that in none are they open to
     reproach. These same gentlemen would gnash their teeth
     to find Hindoostan, from near Delhi, yea from the Seiks’
     country, to Cape Comorin, planted with Christians, who
     daily pray for the coming of Christ’s kingdom in their
     lands; and who, in their intercourse with those around
     them, recommend the gospel of God our Saviour in a way not
     such as will excite insurrection, but induce veneration
     and ultimately conversion. A preaching life these
     Edinburgh reviewers themselves cannot gainsay; and these
     less enlightened heathen are less disposed than they to
     withstand it. But little visible effect will appear in our
     day; the next generation will find a people ‘prepared for
     the Lord.’

     “Our dwelling is on the banks of the Ganges. The common
     mode of travelling is by water, in commodious boats,
     dragged, when the wind is adverse, like barges. At this
     distance from home, hospitality to strangers seems to me a
     peculiar though painful duty, as it breaks in too much upon
     my leisure. There is no such thing as an inn; and very many
     of the passers-by are young officers, whose situation is,
     in general, far from being comfortable. To these I would
     be especially kind, as being also less noticed by many who
     judge of the attentions due to them by the wealth and rank
     they possess. Those youths who are now here join readily
     in our family worship, and delight me when I hear them
     repeating the Lord’s prayer after me with seriousness. Dear
     lads, my heart yearns over them, exposed as they are to
     every kind of temptation, without a rudder or a pilot. May
     God take them into His direction!”

Soon after the date of the foregoing letter, Mr. Corrie was again
suffering from illness. An attack of fever rendered it necessary for
him to place himself under medical care; but throughout the months of
February and March, his disorder seems to have yielded so little to
the remedies applied, that he was almost laid aside from duty. Thus
in his Journal under date of March 19th. he remarks:--

     “March 19th (Sunday.) To-day--not in a condition for
     public worship: so there was none in the morning. A
     merchant and others came to breakfast; and I had family
     worship with them. I have been considering my ways, but am,
     alas I sadly clouded, so that I can remember but little.
     My impatience respecting the backsliding professors has
     appeared, as it is, sadly inconsistent: I ought to have
     pitied and prayed for them more, and felt less anger. I
     bless God for more composure of mind, and drawing out of
     soul towards God. I see, however, I have little of zeal
     for His glory and house. I would have a more single eye in
     this matter. I would desire my own salvation as a means
     of displaying the glory of His grace. I would desire the
     salvation of sinners, that He may be glorified. I would
     engage in proper means for these ends, with a single
     intent that I may bring glory to God, and that God may
     be glorified in me. Let my own personal trials be all
     sanctified to this end! Give grace, O God of grace, to this
     end; and the glory shall redound to Thee, through Jesus
     Christ, the Saviour!”

And again, a fortnight later, he writes:--

     “Easter eve. To-morrow the Lord’s Supper is to be
     administered. Alas, my soul, how many sacred opportunities
     of this kind have been little better than profaned. Long
     did I attend the Lord’s Table in my own self-confident
     spirit, and the same day saw me break the vows I had
     solemnly made. When this self-confidence was in some
     measure discovered, the ordinance became more profitable
     indeed, but the contrary spirit grew upon me; and for
     some time, I fear, the consecrated elements have been too
     little considered. Lord! never let me fancy the means any
     other than the channels of thy grace; but O, enable me to
     discern the Lord’s body at his Table, and ‘with meek heart
     and due reverence,’ feed upon Him by faith! My illness, I
     fear, does not leave me; at least, weakness grows upon me.
     I seem anxious to live.... I would live to glorify God,
     too, though he needs not my wretched poor services. I would
     have my will swallowed up in His. O [Lord] grant me grace
     to this end, then come life or death, all will be well.

     “Easter-day morning, 2nd April. Both in public worship,
     and afterwards, I trust the Lord was present to heal us:
     the people were very attentive. I remembered my native
     land, with sweet recollection, the tabernacle of God, and
     the communion of saints. For my companions’ and brethren’s
     sakes will I seek thy good, O Britain, the Zion of the
     earth! O may these impressions of love and grace remain
     upon my soul! Enough I see, even in this day’s services,
     though unusually joyous, to render precious Him who bears
     the iniquities of his people’s holy things.”

In the beginning of the following month, however, a letter to the
Rev. David Brown contains the intelligence that it had pleased God to
recover Mr. Corrie from his illness:--

                                           “Chunar, May 11, 1809.

     “I ought to have made known to you before this, the safe
     arrival of the Bibles and New Testaments. We have no troops
     here at present to dispose of them to. The Europeans
     hereabout will take a few to distribute at prime cost. A
     fortnight since beloved Martyn passed this by _dawk_.[51]
     He staid only three days, and you will have heard by this
     time of his safe arrival at Cawnpore on the 29th. ult.
     Sabat has left us this morning. The heat of his temper
     broke out against a washerman who had changed a sheet,
     but there seems no doubt of the grace of God being in
     him. He lived with us since the 7th. At Benares, he had
     intended to pass some days, but about forty persons who
     had formerly known him, came tumultuously to the boat,
     and after much confused dispute, he thought it prudent to
     come on here. We have for some time been engaged about a
     Church at Benares; a subscription of about 3000 Rupees has
     been made, and a spot of ground is fixed on. I trust now
     all opposition is silenced, though not entirely done away.
     The hearts of some haters of all good have been brought
     to give money even. One family is highly respectable and
     regular in religious duties. One young officer has become
     a new creature. Of the rest, few alas! seem willing to
     go any further. Martyn wishes for my removal. I did not
     desire it before he came, now I should have no objection to
     it. Less labour than is now put forth on, perhaps in all,
     eighty people, (for the remainder give me no opportunity
     of labouring for them,) would serve for eight hundred,
     and if winning souls be our highest wisdom, the more we
     win, the wiser we shall be accounted. Yet the fear that
     my Benares congregation would be left without a shepherd,
     makes me glad to continue. At Chunar, all seem dead and
     lifeless. Some of the poor women are indeed, growing in
     grace, and that should not be accounted little. One of them
     two days since, on asking her in what way she must attain
     to God’s presence with peace, replied, ‘If I remember the
     name of Jesus Christ: and repenting of my sins, put my
     trust in him, I shall doubtless attain God’s presence.’
     Several are equally well informed, and Martyn expressed
     great satisfaction at their attentive repetition of the
     responses, in prayer &c. Sabat holds my poor old man in
     utter disdain for his comparative ignorance. Sabat is
     indeed a very superior man; none of the Moonshees can
     stand before him. He is most amusing with his logic on
     all occasions. Some of the gay friends of a pious young
     officer, asked him if it were not written in Scripture,
     that men shall become bears? He, in the simplicity of his
     heart, asked Martyn and myself at Dinapore, before Sabat,
     if there were such a passage of Scripture? Sabat replied,
     ‘O if there is such an expression in the word of God, it
     must be true; and we will prove it by logic.’

     “I think I expressed a wish for the tables you mentioned,
     of Arabic &c. with a copy of the Persian of Matthew when
     ready. Mr. Myers[52] would send them and they would be
     highly useful. I am happy to say the complaint I was ill
     of has quite left me, and I trust it is good for me that
     I was in trouble. It is good in any way to have the heart
     separated from this ensnaring world; to be led to have all
     its fresh springs in God. Would it were more thus with me!
     I groan being burdened with an earthly, sensual, devilish
     nature. I wish I could hear oftener of you and your’s. I am
     in hopes those communications that respect our project may
     pass through my hands to Martyn; it would cause only one
     day’s delay. The subject of the conversion of the natives
     is much more discussed among us. I know two converts to the
     subject from reading Buchanan’s Memoir which I lent them.

     “My Christian School goes on well.

     “Beside the Christian children, I have six Christian men,
     and some families.”

The anniversary of Mr. Corrie’s ordination is thus noticed by him:--

     “Saturday, June 10th. This day in 1802, I was ordained a
     Deacon at Buckden, and on the 12th of June 1804, a Priest,
     at the same place. To-morrow may suit my purposed season of
     examination; and I pray God to enable me to this needful
     work. First, to look over my present spiritual state.
     Secondly, To examine my views in the ministry. Thirdly, To
     pray for my Native School. O Lord! vouchsafe a spirit of
     grace and supplication for Christ’s sake!

     “Sunday, June 11th. Have been considering my ways; and
     respecting my personal experience, it is but too apparent
     that I have for some time laboured under a spiritual
     decay. The commencement of it seems to have been soon
     after this time last year, when my spirit began to faint
     in outward duties; and I hurried away from them to
     Calcutta. The Lord does not leave me; and I trust will
     not leave me; yet, O my soul, fear being given up to work
     iniquity. Much reserve, I am aware, in my outward conduct
     is worn off: respecting this, I would hope the needless
     scrupulosity I indulged is going; yet connected with my
     private experience, I would be jealous over myself with
     a godly jealousy. Frivolousness and levity in tongue and
     action, I would watch against. Lord, instruct me, and teach
     me in thy way! In the ministry, I have failed greatly in
     respect of searching out the lost sheep of Christ’s flock;
     nor have I a proper sense of the hurt and hinderance
     arising from this negligence. Lord, grant me a due sense
     of the Saviour’s dying love, and of the soul’s worth! I
     think I do attempt the edification of those who come in my
     way; and have less fear of shame and reproach for Christ
     than once I had. I find a growing facility in speaking
     Hindoostanee; and I trust of late more earnest intention
     of seeking opportunities of propagating the Gospel. My
     views in coming to India I would hope are not altered; to
     live and die here; and to spend my strength and substance
     in this land is, I think, my purpose. The little children
     are becoming very interesting to me. O, that they may
     become partakers of the grace of God in truth! My native
     servants I would try to make wise unto salvation, and often
     am earnestly engaged in instructing them. Lord, grant
     me sincerity and simplicity in dealing with these; and
     enable me to repent of my sins, to ‘do my first works;’
     and ‘leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, go
     on unto perfection.’ I feel how entirely it is Thy work
     to accomplish this in me, then grant me thy Holy Spirit
     graciously for Christ’s sake. Amen!”

With what sincerity of spirit, this recital of his inward resolves
and feelings was penned, may be gathered from the renewed activity
with which Mr. Corrie’s restored health was devoted to the employment
of every means within his reach, that was calculated to extend the
knowledge of Christ. To Mr. Brown he writes early in June 1809:--

     “I have at length begun the Arabic and Hebrew; and with the
     help of the Arabic, Hebrew and Hindoostanee, hope to get a
     correct Hindoostanee version of the Psalms for the black
     flock. The 51st Psalm they are learning by heart.”

Similar notices of his application to the study of the Oriental
languages occur, also, in Mr. Corrie’s letters, about this time,
to Mr. Martyn. Yet the external circumstances with which himself
and fellow-labourers in the work of the Lord, were all this while
conversant, were far from encouraging. In the letter to Mr. Brown
quoted above, Mr. Corrie complained:--

     “My harp has long been ‘hung upon the willows.’ Every thing
     around us bears the image of spiritual death. What little
     profession there was among us, has issued in nothing that
     appears decisive.”

And a few weeks later, after recording in his journal that he “had
often experienced the Divine Presence and grace,” whilst lecturing in
public “on the Epistle to the Galatians,” Mr. C. adds:--

     “I am, nevertheless, cast down greatly with the little
     appearance of good working among us: the soldiers seem
     hardened to all addresses I make: the old native Christian
     has not been lively of late. When not living near to God,
     I seem afraid of the doctrine of grace, as it is called;
     when my soul is deeply affected with divine truth, I can
     trust God with the consequences of His own declarations.”

Whilst having thus to lament the spiritual apathy around him, Mr.
Corrie did not on that account slacken his exertions toward hastening
on the day, when “the stream of Ganges shall roll through tracts
adorned with Christian churches, and the holy hymn be heard beneath
the shade of the tamarind.” Accordingly he writes to the Rev. Charles
Simeon:--

                                                   “Aug. 2, 1809.

     “A door of usefulness has been opened ‘among those of mine
     own nation’ at Benares, where I have been enabled to attend
     every third Sunday, and now materials are collecting to
     build a place of worship with, by subscription. Some of the
     principal people there oppose the measure by their private
     influence, though they have given money for the work.
     The report of the death of one of the chaplains above,
     renders me anxious, lest I should be removed before this
     scheme is accomplished; but I know the accomplishment of
     it rests not with me. I now confine my public engagements
     to the mornings, except one service in Hindoostanee on
     Sunday evenings. I have mentioned a native Christian who
     reads and expounds the lessons on these occasions, so
     that my labour is but small when he is present. Just now,
     he is at Benares, with a view, if possible, to establish
     Christian worship among a number of Portuguese and native
     Christians, who reside in various capacities there. He
     goes from house to house among them, but has hitherto had
     little success. Only three attend worship. I may remind
     you, [that] he conducts public worship according to our
     Church form, translated. The Gospels we have, and I have
     translated the principal particulars of the Old Testament
     history. I may mention that the wisdom of God is manifest
     here, in recording the faults of the Old Testament saints.
     A maxim among all classes of Natives, seems to be, that
     every person, by obeying his own religious guide, will
     attain eternal blessedness, and several of the Mahomedans
     have been offended, at my asserting that Moses, Abraham,
     David &c., were sinners: the proving these saints to have
     been sinners by nature, as ourselves, overturns this
     conceit and makes them to seek out a Saviour, who is
     himself in no need of salvation. To this point, when I have
     opportunity, I always bring a Mahomedan, carefully avoiding
     disrespectful mention of his Prophet. The Hindoostanee
     women attend, though not in such numbers as at first, yet
     regularly, and I have no doubt some of these most despised
     of the human race, will be found at the right hand of the
     Judge, in the great day. A few evenings since, a poor
     blind creature caused my heart to joy exceedingly, by her
     artless commendation of the Redeemer; any praise of myself
     might have arisen from servility, but, the epithets she
     applied to our Lord, could have been learned only from the
     Scriptures. For some time much of my attention has been
     directed to the education of some native christian boys.
     Watts’ first Catechism they can repeat, and a prayer for
     morning and evening in private; two of them have begun
     Persian and make quick progress: there are in all five,
     from seven to twelve years old, and some younger children
     will soon be admitted. I am attempting to introduce
     our own mode of teaching, and when at home, hear them
     twice a day.... No pains have been spared by the Italian
     Missionaries, at Bettiah to frighten, or allure my old
     teacher from me, and one man, who had learned the way of
     God more perfectly here, and on going back refused to
     pray to saints, &c., was excommunicated and grievously
     persecuted until his death, which took place soon after.
     The uproar about Missions has been heard of here, but
     no one feels any of the alarm expressed at home. I hear
     occasionally, from some friends at Malda, of Mr. M. who
     has very poor health; some poor helpless creatures have
     lately received baptism there. You will not suspect me of
     depreciating his labours, by this expression; those among
     whom I myself minister, are as despicable as human beings
     can well be. Their influence on the general cause can be
     none, their individual souls are precious.”

Mr. Corrie had now been three years in India, and it will have
been seen that those years had not been spent in self-indulgent
inactivity, or had been unfruitful in great moral results. Yet he
writes:--

     “Sept. 20th. 1809. This day completes my third year in
     India; and though I could write a journal of events that
     would set me off in the eyes of men, I know myself to be
     an unprofitable servant. I have reason to cry, ‘Deliver me
     from blood-guiltiness, O God;’ from the blood of souls! The
     perverseness of the natives draws out my perverse temper. I
     perceive my mind of late too much taken up with the dignity
     religion inspires the mind with, raising it above the petty
     cares and mean jealousies of an earthly mind: yet, O let
     me never be high-minded but fear. I desire to renew my
     dedication of myself, my all to God; to purpose greater
     exertion and more labours among whites and blacks. Lord, I
     pray thee, grant an increase of spiritual influence, that
     I may go on from grace to grace! O, let me not faint nor
     tire, for Jesus’ sake, Amen!”

The following letters to his Christian friends, bear witness that Mr.
Corrie was enabled, in some measure, to carry out the desires and
purposes which his Journal records.


                            REV. D. BROWN.

                                          “Chunar, Oct. 12. 1809.

     “I have had our meeting service this morning. Cold myself
     and lifeless and stupid. I wonder the people attend at all,
     they are so little excited to run the Christian race.

     “The Christian Native School goes on as well as it can.
     The children, sometimes nine in number, are reading
     the Scriptures in Hindoostanee. I have nearly finished
     a corrected edition (about the 4th) of the history of
     creation, Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Joseph, Moses,
     the children of Israel, Joshua, Samuel, David, Solomon,
     the division of the Tribes, Elijah, Elisha, the Acts of
     the Apostles, the first Epistle of John. Four of the
     children have Watts’ first Catechism perfect, with prayers
     for morning and evening. Two of these have begun Persian
     Grammar, on a new plan of my own, after the English mode
     of question and answer. We have ten Christians about us
     with whom I read and pray, most mornings, in Hindoostanee.
     One youth appears truly pious and reads and explains the
     Scriptures, admirably to others, most evenings after dark.
     A few of the Hindoostanee Women appeared [to be] guided by
     the fear of God,--perhaps four or six. The others complain
     of hearing nothing but severe language, and told the Native
     teacher lately [that] ‘as he was paid for instructing them,
     he ought not to deal so severely with them! He told them,
     he was not paid to flatter them.’

     “I have lately been looking into the Arabic and Hebrew, but
     I entirely despair of making any proficiency in them. The
     Hebrew I shall go on with. Even by the help of the Lexicon,
     I gain great pleasure in observing the roots and their
     connection with the languages around us. If ever you pray
     for me particularly, pray that I may _endure_ to the _end_:
     that _patience_ may _hold out_: that I may be faithful
     _unto death_. May richest grace be multiplied to you and
     your’s.”


                      TO THE REV. J. BUCKWORTH.

                                                   “Nov, 1. 1809.

     “I often turn a look of regard towards highly favoured
     Britain, and a tear starts whilst I bid it a long adieu;
     but to a weary pilgrim any lodging is welcome, any place
     of abode agreeable; so in Hindoostan, my weary head shall
     rest, and my longing soul mount up from hence to meet her
     redeeming God. There, my brother, we shall meet; till
     then, let our willing feet, our heads, and our tongues be
     employed in spreading the Saviour’s glorious name.

                The Saviour! O what endless charms
                Dwell in the blissful sound!

     Your sermon referred to would have suited my people here.
     In much weakness and fear, indeed, I have been among them.
     The Evening Lectures I told you of exhausted me entirely;
     and conspired with other circumstances to bring on a liver
     complaint, from which, I sometimes think, I am not quite
     free: but I am able to endure my labour.

     “You expect to hear of my black flock. My native teacher
     is, at this time, laid up with Asthma: his notions
     of divine truth grow more clear daily. Some of the
     Hindoostanee wives of the soldiers have, also gained good
     information on christian subjects; and from forty to sixty
     regularly attend public worship on Sundays, and once in the
     week. I have nine Christian men and women, and six children
     about me; with these I read and pray in Hindoostanee every
     morning I am at home. One lad of them appears truly pious;
     he has been with me most of the time I have been here; he
     reads and prays in the evenings with the others generally.

     “One night lately I heard him expounding part of the
     sixteenth chapter of St. John with much feeling and
     propriety. I have the charge of him entirely; I begin
     to love him, and think his disposition gentle and
     well-inclined: he always attends at meals for his portion.
     The other servants, at times, I hear tell him he is become
     an Englishman; and seem to envy him not a little.... I
     could fill sheets with the conversations I frequently
     have with the natives. Several promising appearances in
     individuals, have come to nothing. I am, therefore, glad
     that I have not written any thing about them.

     “There has been a serious disturbance here (and it is not
     now quite over) between the Mahomedans and Hindoos. The
     former destroyed a pillar, long an object of superstition
     amongst the Hindoos: on which account the latter carried
     swine and slaughtered them in the Mosques. One hundred and
     forty have lost their lives; but not all from religious
     difference, many taking occasion of the affray to gratify
     private revenge.[53]

     “I can say nothing of my prospects: all you can picture of
     the difficulties attending this work is far short of the
     reality. I can only say, to live and die in this work, or
     to labour until I can do no more, is my not hasty purpose,
     formed, I trust, on no self-sufficient grounds, but on the
     grace, mercy, and comfort of an unchanging God and Saviour.

     “I am writing a little daily in Hindoostanee, Persian,
     Arabic, or Hebrew. My school employs me two portions of
     the day. I am cheered sometimes with the hope, that I am
     educating Missionaries; but it seems hardly possible they
     should escape the pollutions around them.”


       [46] That dated Aug. 2, 1807.

       [47] The controversy alluded to grew out of the
            publication of Dr. Buchanan’s Memoirs on the
            Expediency of an Ecclesiastical Establishment for
            India.

       [48] See Ward, View of History, &c. of the Hindoos. Vol.
            II., book 7, ch. 4.

       [49] Sabat. For some account of this person, see
            Buchanan’s “Star in the East.” pp. 23. &c. He
            afterwards apostatized, left the British territory
            in India, and went into the service of some of the
            native princes; but in some quarrel that occurred he
            was suspected of treachery to his patron, was put up
            into a sack and cast into the sea.--Hough’s “History
            of Christianity in India.” vol. 4. p. 389.

       [50] An article in the Edinburgh Review for 1808,
            entitled “Indian Missions,” written by the late Rev.
            Sidney Smith. At the head of this article are given
            the titles of the principal controversial pamphlets,
            which appeared at that time on the subject of
            Missions to India.

       [51] Post. Mr. Martyn was then on his way to his new
            station at Cawnpore.

       [52] Mr. Corrie’s future father in-law.

       [53] A more particular account of this affair is given
            below, in a Letter to Mr. Simeon.




                            CHAPTER VII.

     REMOVES FROM CHUNAR--ARRIVES AT CAWNPORE--ILLNESS OF MR. MARTYN.


At the end of the year 1809, Mr. Corrie having been directed to
remove from Chunar to Agra, made preparations for proceeding to the
latter station. In the meantime, however, he suffered so much from
the illness mentioned in the preceding letter to Mr. Buckworth, that
for three months he omitted to keep any record of his proceedings. On
the 3rd of Feb. 1810, he observes:--

     “February 3rd. 1810. I have had much searching of heart in
     review of my purposes and projects at different seasons of
     my life, often purposing diligence in acquiring languages;
     at other times my chief desire and labour being wholly in
     the immediate duties of the ministry; and, to be altogether
     separated from mere visiting society. I perceive myself
     to have succeeded in no one scheme; and am to this day
     unprofitable and without ability to any good. Long, long
     have I known this in theory, but evidently did not think
     it of myself. May this sad experience lead me to true
     humility and deep contrition; may it lead me to prayer,
     and to diligence in the means of grace! The sickness upon
     me is more violent than last year, but seems yielding to
     medicine; for which I would bless the Lord, and devote
     myself to His cause. These two Sabbaths I have been laid
     aside from public work, and fear I am not sufficiently
     humbled. O, how I ought to thirst after the courts of the
     Lord! I think I should greatly regret being kept from the
     ministry another Sabbath, but am ready to give up all hope
     of success from my own labours. I know this is from a
     forgetfulness of the Scripture, and of the power of God.
     Lord, awaken a spirit of faith and prayer! The old man goes
     on instructing the native women, successfully, in a few
     cases, I hope.

     “The Roman Catholic padre, with a fair carriage towards me
     tries all he can in private to counteract this old man. O,
     that I were as in days and months past: and, O, that the
     Lord would make His word to prosper among us: and, O, that
     He may direct and prosper my way to Agra, and make me there
     a blessing for Jesus’ sake!”

The chief circumstances of interest connected with the remaining
portion of Mr. Corrie’s residence at Chunar, are related in the
following extracts from his letters and Journal. As, however, in
those extracts there occur some allusions to an Institution, which
about this time sprung up in India, a few words of information will
not be out of place.

The patronage which the Marquis Wellesley (then Earl of Mornington)
extended to a plan for translating the Scriptures into the languages
of the East, had excited the hope that our rule in India would become
the means of imparting the knowledge of the true God to millions of
our fellow men: but the retirement of that large-minded Nobleman
from the government of India, was followed by that determined
opposition to the diffusion of the gospel among the natives of
Hindoostan, of which so many traces have already appeared in the
pages of this Memoir. The consequence was, that notwithstanding
all attempts of Dr. Buchanan, Mr. Brown and others, to procure
translations and copies of the Scriptures; and though aided in
their efforts by grants of money from the Bible Society in England,
yet there was a famine of the word of God even among the native
Christians of India. This dearth of Bibles seems to have pressed
more especially upon the Christians of Tanjore, so that in a sermon
preached in Calcutta, on New-year’s day 1810, Mr. Brown was induced
to make an appeal on their behalf. The result was that a liberal
subscription, headed by General Hewitt, the commander-in-chief,
was raised for the purpose of forwarding the distribution of the
Tamul Scriptures in Tanjore. Encouraged by the success which
attended this effort to procure a larger circulation of the Word
of God, Mr. Brown and his friend proceeded to originate measures
of larger enterprise. They established a _Bibliotheca Biblica_, an
institution which consisted of a “Translation library” and a “Bible
repository.” The “library” was intended to contain the Scriptures
in the original languages, Lexicons, Grammars, works on Biblical
criticism, and generally, all such books as were likely to be useful
to translators. The “Bible repository” was designed to contain Bibles
and Testaments in all languages, European as well as Asiatic, to be
disposed of at moderate prices.[54] It will be seen that with “this
judicious and efficient instrument” for good, Mr. Corrie readily
united himself.


                      TO THE REV. J. BUCKWORTH.

                                                 “March 12, 1810.

     “I cannot recollect how long it is since I was favoured
     with a letter from you: so many are the accidents to which
     our letters are exposed between Britain and India, that I
     attribute the little intercourse we have had to some of
     these; and, therefore, add one more to the many letters I
     have sent you; and trust to hear of you when opportunity
     serves. Sometimes my mind has been deeply affected with
     the idea of growing old without a friend, or solace of
     declining years. Gray has well described the feelings of
     Nature in the lines:

            ‘On some fond breast the parting soul relies
             Some pious drops the closing eye requires.’

     “It is the privilege of faith, indeed, to raise the soul
     above creature dependencies; and, I bless God that, in
     general, I am enabled to say ‘none of these things move
     me.’ Still, I cling, with the fondest recollection, to the
     hours I have spent with you, and the advances in knowledge,
     and I would hope in grace, my soul made in your society;
     nor can I endure the thought of our intercourse being at an
     end.

     “In this strange land, God has also supplied several
     whose letters and occasional visits are a source of great
     comfort and encouragement to me. I believe the number
     of true Christians is increasing among us, and as these
     abound ‘the desert will blossom as the rose;’ and this
     wilderness shall be glad for them. The only principal
     cause of concern is the small advances that are making
     towards the evangelization of the Hindoos and Mahomedans.
     If you cast your eye over the map, you will perceive the
     distance between the different abodes of the Europeans;
     and then, suppose even at those stations something may be
     doing toward this work, how is the intervening space to be
     supplied?...

     “I am recovered from another attack of the liver,
     much severer than last year’s, and which prevented me
     from public duty for three Sabbaths: I reckon these
     interruptions as the choicest blessings. The vain mind
     is tempted, in full health, to lay up for many years;
     but these warnings strongly impress the exhortation,
     ‘whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might.’

     “My European flock, as to numbers, has been at a stand
     of late: some of them, however, are now grown unto some
     stature in Christ; and are a source of great refreshment at
     times....

     “The old native Christian has improved of late, and some
     of the native Christian flock give good evidence of a true
     conversion. At times, whilst ministering among these, my
     heart overflows with delight; and the simplicity with which
     they express themselves is very striking. I only wish the
     number of them was greater: for, alas! who, in comparison
     hath yet ‘believed our report?’

     “I am removed from this station to Agra, once the imperial
     city, where are the most splendid remains of fallen
     greatness in Hindoostan. One of my dear young friends,
     whom I heard of yesterday, says, ‘You are the first who
     has been commissioned to preach in that Nineveh repentance
     and remission of sins. I see a peculiar honour conferred
     upon you by this appointment. May God prosper you!’ My
     soul responds, Amen! The Lord grant my entering in among
     them, may be ‘not in word only, but in power, and in the
     Holy Ghost, and in much assurance.’ Hitherto I have been
     prevented from proceeding, but trust shortly to go on my
     way, by the will of God, rejoicing. One comfort attending
     the journey is, that it will take me by the abode of
     dearest Martyn; and with him I shall make some stay.

     “We regret deeply that no more chaplains, who would lend a
     helping hand, are coming over to assist us. In three years,
     I have been preparing myself, I would hope, for greater
     exertions, by learning languages, &c.; and have done some
     little here towards founding a Christian church; but now,
     alas! the work, to human appearance, will be at a stand. My
     old deacon wishes to go with me though, and I shall take
     him; though at first it seemed better to leave him with
     these ‘few sheep in the wilderness:’ but those of them who
     are most serious have husbands somewhat like-minded, and,
     therefore, are less likely to suffer wrong; and the old man
     will be very useful in a new place. Most of the Christian
     men go with me, in one capacity or another; though they
     are a heavy expense to me. Where we are going, I purpose
     to colonize them, if God in his providence shall supply
     opportunities. Oh! were you but here to talk over these
     subjects with me! You cannot well have a due idea of this
     country, nor of our proceedings, unless you were to be with
     us; but I must restrain my feelings, and rather give you
     some information that will amuse you.

     “Two days since, a Brahmin in authority here, and with whom
     I have had many disputes, took away a copy of the gospels,
     after I had read to him some particulars of the death of
     Christ, which impressed him greatly at the time. My removal
     has made him very anxious; and sometime ago, when I was
     first ordered away, he came, and after many expressions of
     concern said, ‘Sir, I have a great favour to beg before
     you leave this place; pray cause to be written for me
     your account of the first beginning of things, with the
     genealogies of the first ages. Before you came, I never
     heard these subjects spoken of, and when you are gone, no
     one will take the trouble to unfold us any hidden thing.’
     He has now the beginning of Genesis, and the four Gospels.
     Affairs on the continent have taken a most disastrous
     turn[55] to our apprehension; but ‘the Lord reigneth;’ and
     one thing we cannot but rejoice in, _the fall of the man of
     sin_.”


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                                 “March 15, 1810.

     “I yesterday sent off by _banghy_[56] De Coetlegon’s
     Sermons, and some chapters of Genesis in Persian,
     translated by my Moonshee from my Hindoostanee
     translations. It is on this account I sent the Sermons,
     as the Moonshee would give me no peace until you should
     have a specimen of his performance, and give your opinion
     whether or no it will be of any use to go on in this
     way. The occasion of doing thus much arose from some
     Mahomedans about the court at Mirzapore desiring from me
     some account of the books of Moses. Mr. Ricketts, the
     judge, was passing this, and some people in his train.
     They called upon me and immediately expressed a wish to
     see some of the translations they had heard I employed
     myself about. I produced the epitome done by Gladwin, it
     seems, at the request of Mr. Clarke. This they read for an
     hour at least, and on going away begged a copy. Afterwards
     the Molwhee told the moonshee that the Koran gives a more
     particular account of things than our books. To this the
     moonshee answered, that what he had seen was a very concise
     abridgment, but if he were to see the original he would
     forget the Koran. This brought on a violent dispute. To
     make good his assertion, the translation you have a copy
     of was made, and the remainder of the epitome added. One
     chapter was first sent to Martyn, who approved of it,
     and now you must also see it. Our Cutwal[57] here is a
     Hindoo, and has often, with heat, contended with me about
     the comparative authenticity of our books; but on the
     prospect of my leaving seems softened, and has of his own
     accord begged a copy of the beginning of Genesis and of
     the Gospel; which he has got. He often contends eagerly
     with the Mahommedans, and puts them to silence by the
     arguments he has learnt; and on the riots at Benares a
     great concourse of Mahomedans came to him and my moonshee.
     One night they continued to dispute until midnight, not
     respecting Hindooism and Mahomedanism, but entirely
     respecting the Mahomedan and Christian writings. I hope I
     am getting better, but not so speedily as last year. My
     flock is already as without a shepherd. I have not been
     among them for a month. A few came to the house on Sunday
     evening, but the exertion on the occasion, though little
     more than family worship, has thrown me back.”


                                                  “April 3, 1810.

     “Your last letter found me very unwell, so much so, that
     greatly as I wished, I could not engage in answering it. I
     have no fear of being forgotten by you, yet these tokens of
     your regard are indeed very acceptable. It seems a weakness
     in my nature that makes me cling to creatures as I do; and
     the same weakness is the source of what you are so kind as
     to call by a softer name.

     “It would be a cause of deep regret to me to be excluded
     from your ‘Translation library;’ you will really oblige
     me by inserting my name among the subscribers, and I will
     make an effort to set all straight with you and all the
     world. After deducting the amount of the house here, which
     I have sold and am to be paid for in August, I do not owe
     above 3000 rupees: yet I do owe all I am, and all I ever
     shall have in my power, to such purposes as you propose. I
     will endeavour first to be just, and then I will glory in
     devoting my all to the propagation of the gospel in India.
     The doctors say there is no occasion for my going down the
     country, but I shall be guided much by Mr. Robinson.[58]
     He is near at hand; yet come I shall not without some
     alteration for the worse. I have now very little pain, but
     am weak and incapable of application. I should rejoice more
     in visiting Aldeen than Cawnpore even, for the children are
     all very dear to me, and their playfulness delights me. I
     hear Martyn has received the packet from you, and has heard
     from Mr. Simeon that Cambridge university voted Buchanan,
     a D.D. degree.[59] I hear general M. wishes to reside at
     Ghazeepore with the 67th. The poor old man has thrown
     obstacles in the way of our church till the materials
     are likely to be lost, but the congregation increases in
     proportion to the general’s opposition. W. has often 30 at
     Divine Service, and usually about 20. They sing hymns, and
     are generally a very interesting people; though but a few,
     as usual, give evidence of any change.”


                                         “Chunar, April 28, 1810.

     “Your papers have reached me in safety;--viz. 1st. a
     report for 1809. 2nd., the Agra books and papers. 3rd.,
     the Bibliotheca Biblica &c. The ‘Translation library’ must
     prove highly useful. I have some of the books you have
     mentioned--A Golius, Dictionarium Arabicum, Schultens,
     Life of Saladin, Stillingfleet’s Origines Sacræ, Wells’s
     Geography, and others, which shall be sent down, if
     you please; except Golius, which is to be delivered to
     Martyn’s care on my arrival at Cawnpore. But the ‘Bible
     repository’ delights me. This is beyond all your other
     highly meritorious labours, for the benefit of the present
     generation. I shall send it round here, if I have time,
     but I have only eight days more here, and on my arrival
     at Agra will make it public. On receipt of the Report, I
     sent it to some acquaintance here. One sent it to a rich
     Native[60] in the city, who reads English; he has returned
     it with a _Hoondee_[61] for 100 rupees, and an address
     to the Bible Society. I shall, D. V. send it off to the
     Secretary in due form on Monday, and he may send it for
     publication; it appears to me an event that would interest
     at home, but you will judge when you see the whole. It
     has delighted me highly. I have been this week at Benares
     taking leave. E. is not yet arrived. The old gentleman
     there is most gracious always to myself, but is a raging
     bear behind my back against all our measures. It has called
     forth all my little energy to make the poor stand I have
     against his influence. The Church has been delayed under
     various pretexts twelve months, but the materials were
     collected. I made those efforts since March, and at length
     got permission to begin last week. Robinson undertook the
     superintendence as a last resource--and his offer was
     accepted. The gentleman, however, attacked him when the
     work was begun, and called me by name, Augustus Brooke, and
     the Salmons, fanatics, &c. I fear this will make E. less
     forward than he might otherwise have been, but I have left
     a few Bibles and Testaments at Wheatley’s for sale: most
     are already supplied. Though I have not sold one Bible,
     Robinson is anxious to get the Church ready by the time you
     arrive. You can find a congregation. Several families and
     some individuals spoke out on my coming away, the fulness
     of a gracious heart. I often think of an expression in a
     prayer of old Carey’s, in the pagoda, ‘that in the evening
     of your residence in India you might see the light of truth
     shine abroad.’ Your’s and his prayer are, I trust, heard.
     There will be a change in European India, yea there is a
     change; infidels are beginning to hide their faces, and
     the young are growing up at the different stations, with
     a reverence for the ways of God. I perceive the married
     especially most easily prevailed with. Yesterday, on an
     occasion of extraordinary awakening, I, after two or
     three visits, administered the Lord’s Supper to a young
     Captain and his wife, and the wife of another officer. The
     latter had called her husband from a party, and entreated
     him to join our worship; he could scarce refuse. She
     appears serving God with all her mind, though not with
     all understanding: I have just been sending her a book.
     It pleases God to continue me still in much weakness, and
     no little fear as to my long continuance among you. If I
     desire any thing in life but to speak and act and write
     for Him, I pray He may graciously disappoint me and hide
     from me the evil that would follow; but if He has given me
     a desire to glorify Him, I trust He will spare me a little
     that I may shew forth His praise!”

It may not be uninteresting to mention, that the letter which Mr.
Corrie states to have been written by a Hindoo to the committee of
the Bible Society, is printed at length in Mr. Owen’s History of that
Society, (vol. 2. pp. 36-38.) In transmitting the letter, Mr. C.
observed:--

     “This native has acquired a considerable fortune, in
     some employment under our government, in which it was
     necessary for him to read and write in English. On being
     pressed by arguments urged for the supreme importance of
     Christianity, he excused himself by saying, ‘He thought
     if it were so, the British government would have made the
     Christian religion known to their subjects in this land.’
     This objection he urged in a variety of ways, and here the
     discussion ended. On receiving the report for 1809, in
     answer to this, he sent an address to the Bible Society,
     written by himself, and now in my possession, requesting
     that it might be corrected; which was done, retaining his
     own expressions as much as possible.”


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                                  “May 7th. 1810.

     “This morning we left Chunar, and are now on our way to
     Cawnpore. I have recovered greatly of late, but now my
     sister is fallen unwell, and thus we are kept dependant,
     and trust we find it best to be so. On Saturday morning,
     Mr. E. arrived, but did not let me know. I however heard
     about mid-day, and straightway sent an invitation to our
     house. In the evening he came, and next morning Mrs. E.
     and the infant; and we have left them this morning in our
     former habitation. I preached a farewell sermon yesterday
     morning, from Romans x. 1., first: pointing out the meaning
     of salvation as including deliverance from danger:--the
     danger arising from sin, the necessity of salvation from
     sin if we would avoid its consequences, as well as to
     make us meet for the inheritance &c. and second: Why I
     wished them to be saved, viz., from the consideration of
     the misery of Hell, the joys of Heaven and the pleasures
     of religion here. There was great attention. I said a
     good deal too, in the conclusion, on the strain of my
     preaching among them,--that I was aware many did not like
     it,--but pointed out the necessity of delivering my own
     soul, as well as my desire not so much for their favour
     and approbation, considered in itself, but as connected
     with salvation. Here I intended my successor should hear
     something of my opinion of our works. In the evening,
     my little flock were full of expressions of kindness,
     and I think it was a season that will be remembered. The
     Hindoostanees came in a body, and made loud expressions
     of regret at my departure, many of them weeping aloud. In
     the evening too I baptized three Caffres, the servants
     of a gentleman, and who had for some time been under
     instruction. Many were present, and we begun the service by
     singing some verses from _Veni Creator_. Two of them gave
     pertinent answers to some questions on Christianity; and
     on their repeating the creed in Hindoostanee most present
     were melted to tears. Mr. G. has, it seems, professed to
     the General that he will never go to Benares, unless he is
     ordered, and the general has declared he will never order
     him. The Church however is going on under Mr. Robinson,
     and much interest is excited about it. The military have
     desired him to make the building a handsome one, and they
     will add to the subscription. Thus in spite of Satan and
     those he leads captive, the work of the Lord prospers and
     will prosper. I have had packets of letters on leaving, and
     am astonished at the kind acceptance my little more than
     abstaining from evil has met with. It seems to be a wonder
     among them, that I performed my official duty when called
     upon; and especially that I should express my readiness
     to serve them. Dear Mr. R. is greatly excited of late
     towards the best things; his heart has been deeply touched
     by the death of his youngest sister, and he is tenderly
     alive to the blessedness of those who die in the Lord.
     This is a happy event just now, when some of the society
     there, (especially one Captain) seem seriously seeking to
     secure the better part. They know his Father’s character,
     and the advantages he has enjoyed; and also they have
     seen him more retired and more attentive to his duty than
     most; and they seem now to look to him for information.
     We know however, how slow of growth the heavenly plant
     is, from the untowardness of the soil it falls into; we
     know how many blights and thorns it is exposed to: though
     some good appears, we still are not content, but, filled
     with hopes and fears, we watch for the event. I told you
     I had sent the plan of the library to Major Wilford.
     He had not understood me, so I intend writing again. I
     enclose his note with the papers, it will give you a more
     correct idea of his mind towards this work than I can. I
     fear E. will not take any trouble to make known the Bible
     Society proceedings. I send a copy of the advertisement
     to Wheatley’s shop, where it will be seen by many; and
     have left one dozen Bibles, and two dozen New Testaments,
     with Mr. E. at Chunar. Dr. W. I find, does our cause good
     against his will, by his incivility and grasping after
     fees. Do you indeed come up the country? Martyn talks
     of my remaining a month at Cawnpore: at any rate I hope
     to leave there to conduct you to the imperial city. It
     perhaps would be of importance to get Martyn to resign the
     service, and give himself to the translating and printing
     the scriptures. He will not eat the bread of idleness, and
     it is clear his present labours will bring an early period
     to his life. I scarce know how to write it, but so it is. I
     will give you a faithful account from Cawnpore.”

The following letter, addressed to the Rev. Mr. Simeon of Cambridge,
contains a kind of retrospect of Mr. C’s labours at Chunar, and is on
that account given at length, at the risk of the repetition of a few
circumstances which have been already mentioned.

                                                  “May 9th. 1810.

     “I know it will be agreeable to you to hear of the
     progress I am making, if it may be called progress, in the
     appointment I hold. Three years last February, I arrived at
     Chunar, with very imperfect views of the nature of the work
     I had engaged in; the habits and character of Europeans
     undergo an almost entire change, after a few years
     residence here, so that our work among the Europeans takes
     a different turn from the work of the ministry in England.
     We have to argue for the sanctity of the sabbath, the
     extensive import of the seventh commandment, &c., before we
     can speak of the evil of breaking these commandments. The
     necessity of caring about the example we set is decried,
     as, say they, ‘those we live among do not own the authority
     of the scriptures &c.’ My labours have not, however, been
     in vain among the Europeans. A small society among the
     soldiers, I left at Chunar, and some of them will no doubt
     endure unto the end. Of the higher classes many individuals
     are exemplary. A church, or rather chapel, is erecting at
     Benares,[62] and though my successor expresses no zeal for
     the success of it, I doubt not instruments will be raised
     up, and sent forth in due time. I would to God, some of
     the many young men around you, were but excited to engage
     in this service. As to privations, save that of separation
     from dear earthly ties, which is indeed a severe privation,
     we have only to fear being lulled into indolence and fatal
     security. Our countrymen here ought to be held in high
     estimation, and a soul saved in India is indeed a brand
     snatched from the burning, whilst it is usually, also,
     a valuable member restored to society; for scarcely any
     motive, but that which the gospel supplies, can rouse from
     the apathy and overwhelming influence of an enfeebling
     climate and systematic lust.

     “Soon after February 1807, I met with a Native Christian,
     who engaged in reading the Hindoostanee gospels with
     me, and in September following, we began worship in
     Hindoostanee, to the native wives of the soldiers. These
     had been baptized by Roman Catholic priests, but were
     deplorably ignorant of every christian truth. I began
     also with a Moonshee to translate from the books of
     Moses; and though I blush often in review of these first
     attempts, they were useful in conveying some idea of the
     truth, as the Native Christian, by repeated efforts on my
     part, gained a correct notion of the subject, and by his
     exhortations &c. conveyed it to them. About forty continued
     to attend once in the week, and once on the Sabbath, till
     last Lord’s day; some of these I trust to meet at the right
     hand of the Judge ‘in that day.’ Two of them are truly
     spiritual, and many of them unexceptionable in conduct.
     The change in those who attended instruction, is manifest
     to all. I baptized during my residence at Chunar, two men
     and three women; the men and one woman unconnected with
     Europeans, and all except one man are walking unblameably.
     Beside these, many Roman catholic christians come from time
     to time, and several of these are in my service. I have
     five christian children also, who are going with me, that
     their education may not be hindered by my removal. There
     is with me also, a youth about seventeen, whose parents
     are the children of Europeans; this lad gives hope that he
     is a partaker of the grace of God, and is going with me
     for the express purpose of learning the way of God more
     perfectly, that he may become a teacher of the christians
     here, in general lying in darkness as much as the heathen.
     His purpose at present is, ‘according to the language of
     each people,’ so that he requires instruction in English
     and in the native languages also. My native flock, on my
     coming away, expressed their regret by many tears, and
     some by loud lamentations. The old teacher goes with me,
     as there are many native christians at Agra. I wished to
     have left him behind; but circumstances, with the advice of
     beloved Martyn, induced me to let him come as he desired.
     He will probably soon return. The tumult about missions
     has subsided here, though the generality of the English
     are as averse to it as ever. A riot took place at Benares
     last September, which the alarmists here will no doubt
     make all the use they can of, in their reports home. A
     quarrel[63] took place between the Hindoos and Musselmans,
     in which some lost their lives. Report at first magnified
     the number to three hundred, but I have seen a copy of the
     official report to government, and the following, you may
     depend, is the truth. In the reign of Aurungzebe, a Hindoo
     place of worship consisting of a Temple with a sacred Well
     within the enclosure, (or church-yard) was seized upon by
     the king’s order. The temple was appropriated for Mahomedan
     worship, but the Hindoos had still access to the well.
     Whilst the Mahomedans were in power, no disputes arose, for
     the Hindoos consider the king’s order one road to heaven.
     Since the English have had dominion, many causes of
     mutual complaint have risen up, from the disrespect shewn
     by the different sects to each other in their worship.
     The Mahomedans, in their petition to government, state,
     that amongst other indignities, the Hindoos had on a late
     festival, placed an idol in the pulpit of the temple by
     way of contempt, whilst the Hindoos, in their petition,
     relate similar instances of disrespect, shewn to them by
     the Mahomedans. The immediate cause of the riot was as
     follows. An idol being some time since dug out of a ruin, a
     Fakeer began to make it the object of his worship. For this
     end he built over it a mud shed, and afterwards a thatched
     little house, on the border of the disputed ground, where
     the Mosque and Well are. A rich merchant at last vowed
     before this idol, that if he might but have a child, he
     would build a stone house over it: he had a child, and in
     building the house, encroached on the ground the Mahomedans
     claimed, who straightway collecting, demolished the idol,
     and killing cows, sprinkled their blood on many temples of
     the Hindoos, and destroyed a sacred pillar. The Hindoos
     retaliated, and killing hogs, sprinkled their blood on the
     Mosques. To prevent these fancied pollutions there was much
     violence on both sides; and five men were killed and many
     wounded. The soldiery put an end to the tumult.

     “May 17. I dispatch this from Allahabad. I heard here from
     Martyn, who is in usual health, and with whose company
     I hope to be refreshed in eight or ten days, if the
     Lord will. This is a large station of Europeans, and is
     highly deserving of a chaplain. It is, at present, in the
     Cawnpore district. I have several occasional duties as
     they are called, to perform for Martyn, and am detained
     three days on that account. I may have mentioned, that at
     Benares a merchant calls the soldiers and people of his
     own description to worship in his house on the Sunday and
     once a week; and here an inferior officer in the ordnance
     department does the same. He tells me he had last sabbath a
     congregation of fifteen. I have lent copies of the Village
     Sermons at both places, and they use the Church of England
     prayers. But the unhappy pride of rank &c. which prevails
     here to an extent you have no idea of, prevents their
     influence from reaching far, though they are witnesses of
     God, ‘epistles of Christ, known and read of all men.’ Had
     we a few more Colonel Proles, (whom I believe you know,)
     the presence of more chaplains might be better dispensed
     with. He officiates unweariedly, as priest, as well as
     prince of the host; and you will be gratified to hear,
     that very decided marks of favour from the commander in
     chief have been shewn him of late. He is just put into an
     important command at Delhi. I have had a more severe attack
     again in the liver this spring, from which I am, through
     mercy, recovering, and perceive these visitations to be
     most merciful appointments; I hope they may be sanctified
     to me. I trust your health may be restored by this, or that
     at least, you may be continued to keep open the doors of
     Trinity Church for many years.”

The spirit of self-devotion in which Mr. Corrie left Chunar to
proceed to his new station, may be seen in these letters: in his
Journal, also, he repeatedly expresses his desire, that his removal
to Agra may be for greater usefulness in the ministry, and “that
his profiting might appear unto many.” Very earnest, too, are his
expressed prayers, that the Christian youths who accompanied him
might by his means be “led to God, through Christ, in holiness of
life;” and that he might be “enabled to walk circumspectly, so that
the Lord might sanctify his intercourse with them.” And his petition
with regard to his own soul was:--

“O Lord, my inmost thoughts inspect, and teach me to know myself as
thou knowest me; and not to think of myself above what I ought to
think, but to think humbly! O, help me, mighty Lord, and make me a
blessing to many!”

Mr. Corrie reached Cawnpore on Saturday, June 2. 1810, and next day,
writes:--

     “June 3rd. 1810, (Sunday.) I arrived here yesterday
     morning. For some days preceding I have been unsettled,
     and unable to apply myself to any good purpose. To-day I
     have had much sweet conversation with Martyn, but ought
     to lament a want of spiritual affection. In prayer dead
     and lifeless, unaffected with the importance of what I am
     about. O Lord, revive me! This morning I preached to the
     8th Light Dragoons, but sadly without feeling myself; and
     I fear they too were. O thou, who canst make the dead to
     hear thy voice, raise us to a life of righteousness! The
     General here is very attentive to religious duties. I love
     him for what he does; and pray, as do others, that he may
     be blessed in well doing. O Lord, direct my way to Agra,
     and make me a blessing there!”

On the following Sunday we find him noting:--

     “June 10th. 1810. I have been endeavouring to review my
     ways, as connected with the ministry I engaged in this day,
     in 1802. I perceive how greatly I have offended against my
     engagements, in respect of personal holiness, of motives
     in my ministrations, and of intercourse with the world. I
     would admire the goodness of God, my Saviour, in hiding me
     from the strife of tongues, in bearing with the unhallowed
     fire of my public services, in preserving me from returning
     to the world. Especially ought I to praise Him for any
     acceptance he has given me in my work. I have been made
     acceptable to many who know God, and it is no small honour
     to be instrumental in building up God’s church. Some are
     gone to the grave with hope in the name of Christ, through
     my instrumentality, especially Dr. B., and a young man
     at Sewstern. On the voyage to India, R. Y. was roused to
     consider the instructions a pious father had given him;
     and G. V. led to choose the better part. A young man I was
     told, was alarmed on account of his sins from the first
     sermon I preached at the Old Church, Calcutta. B. at Chunar
     is walking in the narrow way: and I hope G. will lay hold
     on eternal life. Among the soldiers, I reckon three at
     Chunar, who seem truly seeking life eternal, beside many
     others more or less hopeful there. But, I fear for them
     all; so desperate are their situations, and trying their
     circumstances. But, perhaps I ought to bless God above all
     for the three native women, viz., the wife of sergeant
     W. of William B. and of John W., they seem to be truly
     ‘partakers of the benefit;’ and may the Lord grant that
     James may go on unto perfection. O may the S’s be found
     among the happy few; with Mr. and Mrs. Y. now in Calcutta!
     I often think I labour in vain; and alas! in comparison of
     the world lying in wickedness, what are these few? But,
     how far do they exceed any reward I could possibly have
     reckoned on, considering my own weakness, inattention and
     worthlessness. My God, I bless thee for these! These are
     my joy and crown: now, let me watch over my own soul; and,
     O thou Spirit of life, and love, and liberty, accomplish
     in me complete redemption! Prosper my way to Agra, and
     prepare much people to thyself there, for Jesus Christ’s
     sake! This evening attended the funeral of Captain W.--H.
     M. 53rd. Regiment. The band played before the corpse; and
     a more affecting scene I have not witnessed for a long
     time. God, I praise thee that I have not been cut down as
     a cumberer of the ground. O, teach me so to number my days
     that heavenly, holy wisdom may be my _only_ pursuit!”

Mr. Corrie had not been long at Cawnpore before it became apparent
that Mr. Martyn’s health was in so unsatisfactory a state, as to
render it necessary that he should be relieved from the duties of
the station. Mr. C. was in consequence detained there to assist
Mr. Martyn. His own account of this circumstance is contained in a
letter:--


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                      “Cawnpore, July 10th. 1810.

     “I have been upon writing to you daily for a long time,
     till at last I know not well what I have to tell you. When
     I arrived here, Martyn was looking very ill, and a very
     little exertion laid him up. Since then you will know that
     I have been ordered to remain here for a time, to assist
     him; and he is already greatly recovered. His appearance
     is much improved. His rest and appetite much more regular,
     and he is altogether better. It will be well, however, if
     his former weakness does not return, when he shall again
     be left to the whole duties of this large station, for his
     frame is by no means suited for strong labour. For myself,
     I am well, and as strong as ever I recollect to have been.
     If I can but avoid a return of the fever, I may last a
     long while; but it is not for us to boast of the morrow. I
     am under the same roof with Martyn. Sabat is within call;
     and of him you will be glad to hear that he is far more
     respectful and careful in his intercourse with Martyn,
     than he used to be. He seems to feel that he has gone the
     ‘length of his tether,’ and is evidently anxious to keep
     on good terms. He seldom omits doing something in the
     translations daily; so they proceed regularly. I am greatly
     pleased with his corrected Persian gospels, which I can
     read with facility; and having read much of the Shah Nameh,
     think the style much like that book. The Hindoostanee New
     Testament will, I suppose, become a standard for future
     editions. To any one acquainted with the Hindoostanee of
     Gilchrist, it will not be very difficult. I am decidedly
     of opinion that the style of any translation for this
     country, ought to be high rather than low; as it will be
     the duty of expounders to understand and explain it; and
     one low expression will make the whole appear contemptible.
     Hard words, also, when judiciously inserted, are no great
     detriment to the sense, whether understood or not, as I
     have often found from the children. I have seen very little
     of the people here, beside the religious soldiers. I hear
     sad accounts from my former flock at Chunar. A young man, a
     physician beloved in the Lord, writes me from thence, that
     those I thought most staunch among the men, are fallen into
     sad drunkenness again; and one of my native Christians,
     too, has turned out very ill there. I had fitted up a small
     church there, and left it for the use of the serious men;
     but it is turned into worse than a ‘den of thieves.’”

In the letters which follow, will be found many particulars connected
with the studies and habits of life of Mr. Martyn, which cannot
fail to be read with melancholy interest. Somewhat minute accounts,
too, of the progress of the last illness of that sainted person,
occur in the letters to Mr. Brown, and which it has not been deemed
requisite to omit; for it can never be thought superfluous to relate
“after what sort” the servants of God “have closed up their days on
earth.”[64]


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                        “Cawnpore, July 31. 1810.

     “You will have received mine of the 14th. which will
     have set you somewhat at ease. Martyn is much affected by
     your anxiety about him; but he says, he does not consider
     himself in danger; and this morning said, he thought a
     month’s silence would entirely restore him. I try all
     methods to induce him to leave the translation for a few
     months, and sometimes seem to have prevailed; and then a
     little refreshment makes him think himself well. The worst
     sign seems to be that for a month past he is rather weaker
     than stronger. On my first arrival he recruited greatly for
     a fortnight, but is now, to say the best, at a stand. He
     has agreed to go on the river to try the effect of change
     and silence; and as soon as a boat can be procured will go
     towards Futtygur. He objects to going to sea at present,
     that the cold season here will be beneficial, and that
     the damps and fogs of Calcutta would be less so at this
     time; and that he is determined to leave this in February
     next, in order to get to sea in March. But, the truth is,
     he expects the New Testament to be done in Arabic by that
     time, and that then he shall be more at liberty. The state
     of his health seems this: he is easily fatigued, and then
     gets but broken rest, with confused and distressing dreams.
     A very little exertion in speaking produces pains in the
     chest, with almost total loss of voice, and almost all
     these symptoms are produced by the evening of every day. He
     is sparing in his food &c., as usual, but takes sufficient
     nourishment, although, he says, with little appetite,
     but from a sense of necessity. I think you will consider
     immediate relaxation necessary, as I do, and have urged so
     repeatedly, and in such a variety of ways, that any one but
     himself would think I wanted to succeed him here. But that
     to me would be one of the painful circumstances attending
     his removal. I think the wisdom and goodness of God evident
     in my former appointment and in my present destination. I
     can do a little in a quiet way for the furtherance of our
     common cause, but this large station would both occupy my
     whole time and make my deficiencies more conspicuous.

     “Aug. 1st. My heart is seldom so much at ease as I wish
     it to be when I write to you. Our dear brother will not
     believe that he is in any danger; nor is it likely he will
     die immediately. A little care makes him feel better, and
     now he hesitates about going on the river at present. He
     has for some days been from morning till night with Sabat
     at the Arabic, getting ready the first seven chapters of
     Matthew: when that is done he is going on with Fitrut in
     Genesis. I wish it had been convenient for you to come up;
     you could have taken him back with you, _vi et armis_:
     but that is past. He speaks of himself as threatened with
     consumption, with all the composure others speak of a
     legacy; but thinks it is not yet begun in him. The failure
     of his voice, and his poor thin frame, make me fear the
     worst; and I tell him freely my chief hope of a cure in
     him is from a removal from this [place] and cessation from
     labour immediately.

     “I can write you of nothing else at present. This subject
     occupies most of my thoughts; I dare not dwell upon the
     probable issue. But we may ‘have all things and abound,’
     whilst we have our God and Saviour. That hymn I sang with
     a heavy heart, when I first left your paternal roof for
     Chunar; and daily find it suitable. The ‘sin that dwelleth
     in me’ makes my life heavy; and but for the invisible hand,
     I should entirely faint, or ‘become a rebuke unto the
     foolish.’”


                      TO THE REV. J. BUCKWORTH.

                                        “Cawnpore, Aug. 16, 1810.

     “I am now under Martyn’s roof: you know of my removal to
     Agra. On our way thither, we found our brother so unwell
     that I applied, and was ordered by the General commanding,
     to remain here for a time to assist him. We enjoy all the
     comforts of religious society we can desire. I am as happy
     as I can desire to be on earth. Had I been with you, as
     you kindly suggest, I could not have been more so; and,
     perhaps not so useful. I am thankful no such temptation
     offered to detain me in England; the wish to have been a
     ‘helper together with you,’ would probably have prevailed
     above all others. It is in vain to conceal that my health
     has suffered from the climate; and chiefly from imprudence.
     The necessity of cessation from labour it imposes is most
     painful. I bless God for these sicknesses, above all His
     other mercies, as connected with the salvation which is
     in Christ Jesus. I trust I know that he is blessed who is
     instructed whilst undergoing correction. At times, I have
     had such views as I cannot describe, of the excellency
     of the rest remaining for God’s people, so as to make me
     ‘desire to depart and be with Christ;’ but, these sweet
     moments are alas! only of short duration. How does the
     corrupt nature emit clouds of vain and vile passions, which
     obscure and darken the greater part of my days! Blessed be
     God for Jesus Christ!

     “The account of one day will give you a general idea of
     our whole manner of life. We usually rise at day-break,
     and ride out. Martyn and I breakfast between six and seven
     o’clock: then read the scriptures with a Polyglott before
     us, and pray. Martyn then goes to his study. I go to see
     Mary; and she and Mrs. S. are learning Hindoostanee in
     order to be able to speak on religion to their female
     servants; and if circumstances favour, to get a school of
     female native children. I am their teacher. Mrs. S. has
     a school of European children belonging to the regiment.
     I return to reading, usually Hindoostanee or Persian. At
     eleven, my Christian children come to say the lesson they
     have been learning with the native schoolmaster. In the
     middle of the day we have a repast; and then resume reading
     till four, when the Christian children come again to read
     in the Hindoostanee gospels. In the evening we meet,
     usually, at Captain S’s, or Martyn’s, when we sing some
     hymns, with reading and prayer before we separate. This
     is the peaceful tenor of our way. At the intervals, two
     days in the week I visit, and pray with, the sick in the
     hospitals: on the Sabbath, public worship; in the morning
     at the drum-head of one of three European corps lying here,
     in rotation; in the evening of Sunday and Wednesday, we
     have social worship with a goodly number of pious soldiers
     in a public building fitting up, but not yet ready to open
     as a church: besides these [services] once a fortnight
     there is public worship in the General’s house. Except the
     soldiers, all our other English rank as gentlemen. We have
     here only these two classes, except a very few persons in
     trade.

     “I do not consider myself at home here; and am longing for
     Agra, that I may commence more extensive plans among the
     heathen. My Christian boys are becoming very dear to me;
     one especially is very intelligent and hopeful: they will
     be well grounded in principles; and I pray God to give them
     spiritual understanding. They come to me with their little
     complaints, and their Arab black faces often make me very
     merry; nor would I leave the often painful, because tedious
     task, of attempting to make them wise unto salvation, even
     to be the helper of my beloved Buckworth.

     “I know not if I wrote to you on our leaving Chunar in May.
     The native teacher has returned thither; and I reckon some
     of the native christians there to be truly spiritual. I
     hope to have a large native flock at Agra: there are few
     Europeans there, which will leave me more leisure than I
     have here. Respecting our brother Martyn, his health is far
     from good, his constitution far from strong: he is going to
     sea before long, (D. V.) to try sea-air. May God render it
     effectual to his restoration! His life is beyond all price
     to us. You know what a profound scholar he is, and all his
     acquirements are dedicated to the service of Christ. If
     ever man, since St. Paul, could use these words, he may,
     ‘One thing I do, &c., (Philip. iii. 13, 14.) He has, with a
     learned native, finished the translation into Hindoostanee
     of the whole New Testament; which is ready to be sent to
     the press, when money is supplied. He is going on with
     the books of Moses. Sabat has finished the four Gospels,
     the Acts, and to 2nd. Corinthians, in Persian and Arabic,
     which Martyn compares with the Greek. The Bible Society
     helps nobly, and will continue to foster ‘the day of small
     things’ among us.

     “It is in my heart to live, if health permits, and to die,
     among these people. This, my brother, is my true life, I
     find; and often, in the anguish excited by the idea of
     seeing you all no more, I use those words, ‘Cease, fond
     nature, cease thy strife; and let me languish into life.’
     To live to God is life indeed. I am infinitely unworthy of
     the place I fill, and miserably defective in every part of
     it; but no one else offers to supply my lack, so that the
     little I do would be left undone, were I not where I am.
     May God keep me faithful unto death! Yea, faithful is he,
     therefore I shall endure: through his power, I shall meet
     you before the throne. It matters not, then, where we are
     for the short time of our day.”


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                        “Cawnpore, Aug. 17. 1810.

     “I have made three attempts at a report respecting our
     brother’s health. On the 15th. he was very lively, and then
     talked of not going even on the river. Yesterday he was
     weaker, and last night had a violent attack of sickness,
     which has not entirely left him yet, and has brought him
     to a lamentable state of weakness. What to do I don’t
     know. I have urged his leaving his studies and trying
     change of air, in every possible way. To-day, indeed, he
     talks again of going on the river, and I hope to keep him
     in this mind. Your applications for Arabic have set him
     to work anew with an ardour that nothing but death can
     repress. From seven in the morning till near or after six
     in the evening (save a little interval at mid-day,) he is
     at work with Sabat, and Mirza Fitrut. In vain I warn him
     of the consequences. Never was any one so inattentive to
     health, or so unskilful in sickness. I was up with him much
     of the former part of last night: and without somebody
     he would be worse from his unskilful applications. He is
     indeed most tractable as to meats and drinks, but there my
     authority over him ends. He will have told you of the delay
     occasioned by want of an Arabic scribe. I don’t know how
     many copies, but Sabat says ten, have been attempted of
     the beginning of Matthew for you, and have failed. I wrote
     to Major Wilford lately, to ask him if he would read and
     give his opinion of the Sanscrit Gospels. I have received
     his answer this morning. He says, ‘I rejoice to hear of
     the progress that is making in the attempt to diffuse the
     knowledge of the word of God among the Gentiles, but I
     lament that hardly anything has hitherto been done worth
     notice, to diffuse it among the Hindoos. Every thing seems
     calculated for the Mussulmans.... The Sanscrit translation
     of the gospels is useless, for the proud and stubborn
     Brahmin will never read it. We want a good translation in
     Hindee, pure Hindee.... Where the Missionaries at Serampore
     have learned the Hindee, I am at a loss to divine. I hope
     their assistants do not understand a word of Persian. With
     regard to the Sanscrit translation, I am very unwilling
     to have anything to do either directly or indirectly with
     the Serampore school; but in the sincerity of my heart I
     wish them success. It was my intention to have leisurely
     erased all the Persian words out of my friend’s’ (Hunter’s
     translation, a copy of which I gave Major W.) ‘version;
     for I am not in the least afraid to revise his or any
     other version, _even publicly_. It has not been in my
     power hitherto (from ill health), and God alone knows
     when I shall be able to resume my studies _con amore et
     spirito_.’--Thus far Major Wilford.”


                                        “Cawnpore, Sept. 4, 1810.

     “Our brother it seems, has told you, he is so well, all
     further reports respecting his health are needless. I
     would, however, prove how ready I am to comply with your
     wishes, though, I hope too, all anxiety respecting Martyn’s
     recovery is at an end. It seems he requires only rest.
     It is to be hoped, his constitution is not unsound, but
     has been greatly tried by his continual exertions. During
     the last fortnight the change for the better in him has
     been very evident, but on Sunday evening, the pain in
     his breast returned, sufficiently to shew him, he must
     not fancy himself what he once was. He began to ask, why
     he should go to Calcutta?--being so much better; but
     this feeling of his former complaint, has, I hope, put
     all doubts on the subject to flight. Indeed I have made
     his leaving the station a condition of my remaining. The
     General has consented to my being put in orders to remain
     here, till Martyn’s return, and to give Martyn an unlimited
     leave of absence. So now, on the 1st of Nov. he purposes
     leaving this for Calcutta, and is meditating schemes of
     usefulness on his way down, and among the native, Armenian,
     and Arabian christians in Calcutta. It will be of much
     importance that you should see him, and talk with him face
     to face, about the translations, &c. Sabat, I told you, is
     much more on his guard and more respectful towards Martyn,
     but causes him great uneasiness, by the slow progress he
     makes in his work. It is indeed very trying to our brother,
     as, without some change, the translations will hardly ever
     be brought to an end. It is needless for me to say anything
     about the subscriptions, &c. as Martyn writes to you so
     fully on those subjects. For my own part, I am anxious,
     that some translation should be got ready for circulation
     in India; there is yet, none that seems suited to the
     population we are among; and my views are chiefly confined
     to these people; among these I shall probably live and die,
     but no extensive good can flow from the labours of any,
     till the Scriptures are ready to be delivered to them. I am
     therefore more delighted with your intention of publishing
     the Hindoostanee gospels, than the Arabic, whilst I pray
     you God’s speed with both. About one fifteenth of the
     population of this country is Mahomedan, and of that
     fifteenth part, not one in five hundred knows Arabic; but
     many of them are acquainted with and admire the Persian,
     and all of them understand the Moors, as it is called. Many
     too of the Hindoos understand it, and a skilful reader
     could easily make it understood by all.

     “Sep. 12. Thus far I had written as above, but your
     frequent letters from and to Martyn, made me think it
     unnecessary to send this. In consequence of your last,
     Martyn intends leaving this, as soon as boats can be
     procured for himself and Sabat, but it is uncertain when
     that may be, as boats are in great request for the General
     and his suite. Martyn had frequently expressed to me his
     opinion respecting the incorrectness of Sabat’s Arabic,
     as well as complained of his slow progress. It is likely,
     however, that his work will be found better than your last
     would suggest: so few are qualified to criticise Arabic,
     that probably many of the objections raised, will be
     found groundless. I think, however, dearest Sir, to give
     the light of life to the population of India is no small
     honour put upon your Committee, and I hope you will put the
     Hindoostanee translation, Martyn is bringing down, to the
     press straightway. We have, during last week, been often on
     the river in a borrowed pinnace, and the effect has been
     good to us all. Our dear brother continues to mend, but the
     length of his life will depend much on his desisting, or
     not, from public duties. He would soon be laid up again,
     were he to begin to preach. He would, at all events, take
     half of the duty last Sunday, but beside not being heard by
     half the Regiment, he was obliged to shorten the service,
     and with the Faqueers in the evening, brought on the old
     pain in his breast. The same employments as before occupy
     me, so I have nothing new to write to you. Our society
     of soldiers increases, and we are inexpressibly happy
     together. Mrs. S. has been unwell, but is recovering, and
     indeed we have mercies multiplied upon us without number.
     May we have grace to be more thankful.”

It may be proper here to state, that the Committee referred to in
this letter, as being instrumental in giving “the word of life to the
population of India,” was a Committee formed in Calcutta for holding
correspondence with the British and Foreign Bible Society in England.
This corresponding Committee was definitely organized in August,
1809, having Mr. Brown for its Secretary; and measures were then
adopted for carrying forward approved translations of the Scriptures
in the Arabic, Persian, Hindoostanee, and Telinga languages.[65]

That to “live and die among” the people of Hindoostanee, which is
here only expressed as a probability, had become a settled purpose
with Mr. Corrie, may be gathered from his Journal:--

     “Sept. 20th. This day has completed my fourth year in
     India. My intention of remaining in India continues the
     same, and of seeking the furtherance of the gospel among
     the heathen. These Christian children engross much of my
     time; but not so much prayer as they ought. I would purpose
     to pray more for them. Oh! may I have grace to be devoted
     to the ministry! I do determine to be so, the Lord being
     my helper: my determined choice is the doctrine of Christ
     and him crucified. O may my affections be more taken up
     with God! A variety of circumstances have of late made me
     feel that the best of creatures are subject to vanity.
     I would complain of none, for the most vain are far
     preferable to me; but, O may my soul be more taken up with
     God! Draw me, O Lord the Spirit, and I will run after Thee!
     Martyn is now going to Calcutta and to sea; and I remain
     here for a time. I feel my bodily health far from strong.”

And in writing to a near relative, about the same time, after
mentioning the intended departure of Martyn from Cawnpore, and the
consequent changes, Mr. C. adds,

     “These uncertainties make us more and more to feel that
     this is not our rest. I do rejoice in the blessed hope of a
     rest remaining for the people of God.

     “One of the godly soldiers departed this life last night.
     His end was peaceful and blessed. His last words to me,
     yesterday morning, were, ‘I desire to depart and to be with
     Christ as soon as possible.’ A day or two before, on my
     asking him how he was, he said, ‘Waiting to be made free
     from corruption and fit for God.’ And at the same visit he
     said, ‘Blessed Saviour! He has done great things for my
     soul.’ His life, for some time past, had been suitable to
     the gospel. This is the third who has been taken from the
     little flock since we came here. Blessed be God, who raises
     up one and another to supply their places.

     “One of the officers has joined himself to our meetings for
     worship, &c. and is a hopeful and pleasing young man, and
     a great encouragement to the poor soldiers, who for a time
     were much discouraged by their superiors.

     “We have had several instances of very awful awakenings of
     conscience in the prospect of death. One person, a week
     or two since, could not contain his feelings in the midst
     of the many sick around him, in the hospital, but openly
     accused himself, and loudly called for mercy. However, the
     generality, alas! are careless, notwithstanding these and
     other solemn warnings. A gay, smart young Captain, a short
     time since was seized with a fit in a large company, at
     dinner, and died during the night. A great crowd attended
     his funeral, and all the solemnity and pomp of military
     parade attended, but alas! the impression passed away....
     There are indeed a few (and the number is increasing) of
     godly people, scattered up and down, who are each a light
     in his place.”

The references which are found in the foregoing letter and in the
letters which follow, to the “incorrectness of Sabat’s Arabic,”
and to the “rage” of that unhappy man, “against the moonshees of
Calcutta,” are explained by the circumstance, that just before Mr.
Martyn left Cawnpore, he had received intelligence from Mr. Brown
that the translations of the Gospels into Persian were considered
to be too imperfect for publication; whilst it was insinuated that
Sabat’s translations into Arabic were but copies from some old
version.[66] This apparent failure in an object so near his heart, as
the translating of the Scriptures, occasioned great distress of mind
to Mr. Martyn; and all the evil passions of Sabat were exasperated by
the imputation cast on his learning. In these letters, may be but too
plainly traced the unrestrained workings of that pride, selfishness
and violence in Sabat which afterwards ended so mournfully, though
not unnaturally, in his apostasy from the “faith which” always
“worketh by love.”


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                         “Cawnpore, Oct. 4, 1810.

     “Our brother Martyn left this on the 1st for Calcutta,
     in better health than for some time, so that, but for
     the Arabic translation, he would perhaps not have been
     persuaded to leave this at present. Since I wrote to
     you, I have had a specimen of the violence of Sabat, and
     the inexpressible trouble Martyn must have had with him.
     It began before the last letter of yours came, about
     boat-hire. He began by writing that Martyn ought to pay
     for his boat. On this Martyn referred him to you, but he
     evidently wished not to speak to you on the subject. Soon
     after this, your last arrived, and Martyn did not tell him
     the whole of its contents; at first only said, you were
     more than ever urgent for their going down speedily. As
     the time drew near, he one day came in, and after much
     cross-purposes, demanded to see the order for his going
     down, or he would not stir; intimating that Martyn had
     some sinister motive and interested purpose in taking him
     down with him. It is impossible to convey to you an idea
     of the aggravating manner and expressions he used. I lost
     patience, and told him plainly, how unchristian his conduct
     was, and how little like the gentility he pretended to.
     Martyn then read him your letter, which filled him with
     rage against the Calcutta moonshees, &c., and he determined
     to set off instantly, and put them all to flight before
     Martyn could arrive. This manner lasted two or three days,
     when an invitation he had asked for, came from Baillie,[67]
     and away he went to Lucknow, purposing to return the third
     day. Instead of returning, he sent a note to say, he
     would stay twenty days, or a month, and would translate
     and Baillie would inspect; and so he would come down to
     Calcutta armed for the contest with the objectors there.
     Martyn was hurt at this, and wrote a statement of the
     circumstances to Baillie; telling Sabat also, he should set
     off as he intended, should go to sea, and that the disputed
     translation would remain in suspense; and of course, as he
     could not go on with the work, it was likely his salary
     would be stopped; adding also, that his family would be
     obliged to remove into another bungalow, as my sister
     would come here. On this, Sabat wrote in the most earnest
     manner, for Martyn not to go without him; at the same time
     saying, he should stay four or five days longer. To this
     Martyn paid no attention, but set off, and yesterday Sabat
     returned, full of rage against him, and purposing to set
     off to-morrow or next day to overtake him if possible, and
     at all events to procure from you full redress of his many
     wrongs. There is little hope that any person but Martyn,
     supposing them capable and willing to superintend Sabat’s
     translations, could bear with him; and indeed when the
     work would be finished by him, it is difficult to say. His
     unsteady and haughty temper is likely to prevent his ever
     doing extensive good, not to say, that the love of money
     has too evident hold of him. He has procured boats. He is
     now full of expressions of concern about his wife, who is
     within a month of having a child: and indeed his concern is
     proper enough, but had he set off as was first agreed, he
     might have been now in Calcutta. For my part, I feel quite
     alone and a stranger in the midst of this large society.
     Parson, you may have heard, is wishing to come here under
     the idea, as he says, that I was going away, to leave
     Martyn sinking under the duty. I had not thought of so
     doing; but heartily glad shall I be to give place to him,
     as my own strength is not likely to hold out long under the
     constant duties of this station. The folly and dissipation
     of the higher sort, cast me greatly down. How to deal
     with them, I know not. The church was opened last Sunday,
     which may give me more opportunities with them, than I
     should otherwise have had. A few of the poor receive the
     word gladly, and they are our joy and crown. Your opinion
     of the Native boys, has caused me great disquietude. I was
     convinced of danger as to their turning out well, but hoped
     not quite so much as you describe. It has made me more
     watchful over them: but I shall make a fair experiment with
     them. I trust all your family are enjoying good health, and
     as much comfort as this world of sin and sorrow will admit
     of.”


                        TO THE REV. H. MARTYN.

                                         “Cawnpore, Oct. 8, 1810.

     “Yours of the 3rd. from Allahabad, came only yesterday.
     We were thankful to hear you had got so far in safety. I
     received the enclosed also yesterday, and sent one or two
     of less consequence for you to Calcutta. We had a very
     large congregation yesterday, beside the morning service
     with the 53rd. I have escaped with a severe head-ache this
     morning; I trust to be quite well to-morrow. I called at
     R----‘s, G----‘s, E----‘s, and B----‘s this morning, so
     am making great progress in my work, I hope; though this
     of calling is a very insignificant part of it. I have,
     since you left, seen in the life of President Edwards,
     that he thought ministers should consider their talent for
     conversation, and, if they cannot improve conversation &c.,
     should stay at home. If I had the least pretension to his
     usefulness in the closet, I should be inclined to dwell
     there. The gateway to the church shall be put up as you
     wish; at present we are busy making Sabat’s house sweet. I
     have got the christian children close by the book-room, and
     hope to have a watchful and effectual eye over them now.

     “I wrote to Mr. Brown on Thursday, and gave him a
     particular account of my opinion of Sabat. I told him,
     what, I fancy, I did not tell you in the former cover
     enclosing Mr. Brown’s, that on Sabat’s return from
     Lucknow, he expressed great warmth about your going without
     him, and the subject of your letter to Baillie. It seems he
     was sorely hurt at your writing to Baillie on the subject;
     Baillie had shewed him the letter, &c. He wished me to
     side with him in thinking you had treated him as a Hindoo,
     &c. After many words, I told him, that no other person
     I knew, would have borne with him as you have done; and
     that all the christians in Europe would think so, if the
     circumstances were known. This stopped his violence; and
     during the few remaining days he shewed great humiliation,
     and at parting _seemed_ much cast down. I hear he had
     been beating the _dandees_,[68] and they all ran away at
     Georgemow, but as I have heard no more, suppose he got off
     somehow. The Mirror is come this week as usual; when you
     arrive, be so good as to order it to come in my name, as I
     wish to continue it. There have been enquiries respecting
     you, from everybody I have seen, and as many kind wishes
     for your speedy return in health.”


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                        “Cawnpore, Oct. 10, 1810.

     “I sent off yesterday by banghee, a correct copy of
     the Hindoostanee New Testament, for Martyn at your
     house; he has one copy with him beside. I heard from
     him from Allahabad on the 3rd., he was going on his way
     prosperously. I have sent some letters that came here for
     him, to meet him at Patna. Shepherd will be here in a few
     days. He was to leave Meerut on the 1st. I have then the
     whole range of the Doab.[69] Our new church was opened,
     as I told you, by Martyn, and we had a larger attendance
     on Sunday last. The natives are greatly pleased with the
     bell; they argue for the antiquity and holiness of their
     own use of bells in their temples, from the English also
     using them. The Sherwoods are living next door, and have
     made a gate into our garden. The continual calls of duty
     of one kind or other, leave me very little time with
     them. I have got the christian children within call of
     my window, and entirely separated from the other parts
     of the premises. Mary talks of beginning a school for
     native christian girls. She can read the Persian character
     pretty readily, and we have a promising half-caste boy,
     who will be her schoolmaster. We are progressing, I think,
     both among the Europeans, and in our little establishment
     for the natives; yet, I know not why, my mind is almost
     always cast down and without hope. The select meeting of
     the poor soldiers is a source of much, and almost the
     only refreshment to me. I would desire greatly to begin
     a meeting with the 8th Light Dragoons, where many of the
     men are hopeful, but I fear my bodily strength would sink
     under it, for as it is, I cannot keep quite rid of a cough
     and other symptoms of weak lungs. I know, however, that my
     Redeemer liveth,--let me quietly leave all with him, and
     he will bring it to pass! When will the chaplains Dr. B.
     mentioned, arrive? Simeon says, he can get no chaplains to
     come out; even worldly men dread our climate so much, they
     will not encounter it.”


       [54] Owen, Hist. of the Bible Society, Vol. 2. pp. 1-32.

       [55] Alluding probably to the successes of Napoleon in
            Germany, which terminated in the treaty of Schönbrun.

       [56] Carrier.

       [57] A kind of Police officer.

       [58] Son of the late Rev. T. Robinson, of Leicester.

       [59] Pearson’s Memoirs of Dr. Buchanan, vol. 2. p. 211.

       [60] Named _Jounarain Ghoshaul_, a resident in Benares.

       [61] Bill of Exchange.

       [62] Mr. Corrie laid the first stone of this Church, on
            the morning of Tuesday, April 29, 1810.

       [63] A full account of this religious tumult is given in
            Bishop Heber’s Journal.

       [64] Hooker, “A remedy against Sorrow and Fear.”

       [65] Owen’s History of the Bible Society, vol. ii. pp.
            14, 15.

       [66] See Martyn’s Letter to Mr. Brown, dated Sept. 10,
            1810.

       [67] The English resident at Lucknow.

       [68] Native boatmen.

       [69] The whole country lying between the rivers Ganges
            and Tumna.




                            CHAPTER VIII.

                        RESIDENCE AT CAWNPORE.


After Mr. Martyn had taken his departure for Calcutta, the clerical
duties connected with Cawnpore devolved upon Mr. Corrie. Some idea
of the varied and laborious nature of those duties will have been
gathered from the foregoing correspondence, and will have been
sufficient to explain the anxiety with which the arrival in India of
additional Chaplains was made the subject of enquiry. Not the least
fatiguing portions of a Chaplain’s duty were the long journeys he
was repeatedly called on to make, for the purpose of solemnizing
marriages between Europeans, and administering the Sacrament of
Baptism to their children. Two journeys of this kind Mr. C. had
to undertake within a month after he had been in the sole charge
of Cawnpore:--one into Bundelcund, the other to Coel, distant at
least 200 miles up the country. In the latter journey Mr. C. was
accompanied by a young friend; and under date of Nov. 20, remarks,

     “COEL. Arrived here this morning, to marry a couple. I have
     reason to be thankful that my pride, and angry feelings
     have been more in subjection towards the servants this
     journey. I have, however, to lament one instance of undue
     anger; but, in general, their perverseness has not caused
     the impatience and excitement as on former occasions; ‘be
     not high-minded, but fear:’ ‘by faith ye stand.’ During the
     journey to Mynpoorie, G., expressed, on the whole, true
     christian conduct, love of the word of God, and prayer, and
     often feeling impressions of his own unworthiness before
     God, and the need of the Holy Spirit’s grace, to perfect
     him in holiness; which, also, on Sunday evening, he spoke
     of, as if he felt their comforting and sanctifying power.
     May the Lord God, the Saviour, confirm, strengthen, and
     establish him!

     “At Mynpoorie, the proposition for public worship was
     readily entertained, and most of the station, (in all
     fifteen,) attended at the judge’s house on Sunday. I
     preached on the benefit of the scripture history, with some
     boldness, and comfort to myself; and there was a great
     attention given; and afterwards two baptisms.”

It would seem from circumstances noticed in his Journal, that
in consequence of his declining to take part in some frivolous
amusements that were going on at Coel, Mr. Corrie did not meet
with that kindness and social regard which he might naturally have
expected; and his affectionate spirit seems to have been somewhat
deeply wounded.

     “O my God!” he observes, “I bless thee that thou didst
     deign to look upon me, and to call me to the adoption of a
     son, through the grace of Christ! I have said unto my soul,
     ‘The Lord is my portion in the land of the living.’ Why
     should a soul its thirst bemoan, who has a fountain near?
     I would not take one step backward to conciliate their
     [favour.] ‘Let them return to thee, but return not thou
     to them.’ [Jerem. xv. 19.] My soul adores the divine will
     in this command. No more would I go to the world. I have
     observed much of late, what Newton expresses in the hymn,
     ‘Prayer answered by crosses.’ I have been desiring to be
     more dead to the world, and the Lord has been pleased to
     make it bitter to me.”

His Journal then proceeds:--

     “Agra, Nov. 26th. Arrived here yesterday morning from Coel.
     In the morning, on viewing the magnificent remains of this
     city, I was not duly sensible of the vanity of earthly
     glory. O that my mind were always alive to the vanity of
     present things, in comparison of eternal!

     “In consequence of orders from Colonel B., the European
     artillery, to the amount of four hundred, attended divine
     service in the dewan. I stood on the marble slab which was
     occupied formerly by the vizier, when handing up petitions
     to the emperor, in the balcony above. Many of the officers
     attended; I preached from Malachi iii. 18. I much fear they
     did not understand me, but a general attention was given:
     in the afternoon, I went out to Nonilla, and baptized
     three children; several of the young officers attended,
     and kneeled down very devoutly. My heart rejoiced, and was
     raised to God for a blessing upon them. To all appearance,
     they are such as our Lord, in the days of his flesh, would
     have loved; my soul desires their salvation. Oh, that the
     Lord would take them effectually in hand! Oh, the depth
     of divine wisdom and knowledge! Alas, that these engaging
     forms of human nature should be slaves of sin, and so,
     objects of the divine displeasure. Just and righteous
     are thy ways, O king of saints! Oh, how I ought to praise
     God for the acceptance He gives me among men who yet are
     by no means conformed to His word! Oh, may the good Lord
     make them willing and obedient, that they may be blessed
     with all spiritual blessings in Christ; and, may all their
     kindnesses be returned a hundred fold into their bosoms!”

Some further particulars of Mr. Corrie’s journey up the country, as
well as of his flock at Cawnpore, are found in the following letter.


                        TO THE REV. H. MARTYN.

                                        “Cawnpore, Dec. 21, 1810.

     “I returned last night from Muttra and Agra, and found
     your’s of the 3rd instant.... If I were in Calcutta, I
     should vote against your preaching every week. If you
     will not take rest, dear brother, come away back, and
     understand, if you can, from those in power, if I am to be
     permitted to remain with you here, or not. At Agra there
     will be little labour among the Europeans; some good, I
     suppose, might be done among the native christians. I this
     time visited the Roman Catholic place. The premises are
     large, but every thing going to decay from the covetousness
     of Angelo. There is a church of one long room, the roof
     arched, at the east end a round recess, like the Mosques of
     the Mahomedans, and a picture of the Virgin with a child
     half as large as herself, over the high altar. At Agra
     we had no public worship on Sunday; there was nobody in
     garrison, and the Artillerymen were a far way off. Colonel
     M. sent after me a draft for 1600 rupees!!! I suppose he
     meant to try, whether a mighty bribe would not prevail to
     draw me from our purpose.[70] I returned it with thanks,
     and have heard no more of the matter. I have been with
     Captain P. who commands the 53rd, and he will send to
     desire the Regiment to be marched to Church on Sunday. I
     hear from C--, that the society continues to walk in the
     fear of the Lord, and are, I hope, multiplying in number.
     Some new members are to be admitted to-night, I do not
     know how many. I regret to hear, the man of the 8th. you
     remember, has been behaving ill since I was here, yet there
     is one it seems, who is disposed to come out from among
     them. He has been often with C--, so I shall go down as I
     intended and fixed with the schoolmaster of the 8th. though
     the above man was the first encouragement, and must now be
     kept at a distance. I should not forget to tell you, of
     dear Harrington’s continued stedfastness, and attention
     to the men when I am absent, which is no doubt one reason
     of their consistency. S. has invited the religious men to
     a dinner on Christmas day. They must be greatly comforted
     by these circumstances, no longer constrained to hide
     themselves through fear of man. We are all well, blessed be
     the Lord our Saviour. May you increase in strength of body,
     and be strengthened with all might by the Spirit in the
     inner man. Love to all the saints. All here wish you grace,
     mercy, and peace.

     “I shall proceed with all care with Mirza. There is no
     fear of any further inconvenience. I have resisted; he
     has submitted; we are now as before. I have not seen him
     to-day, but will, (D. V.,) write fully about him in a few
     days.”

Letters which Mr. Corrie addressed to Mr. Martyn and Mr. Brown
respectively, a week later than the preceding date, give a pleasing
account of the state of the congregation at Cawnpore; and supply,
also, a specimen of the difficulties with which the earlier
Missionary labourers in India had to contend, in their efforts to
secure translations of the Word of God into the native languages.


                        TO THE REV. H. MARTYN.

                                        “Cawnpore, Dec. 26, 1810.

     “Yesterday divine service was appointed at eleven. Few of
     the soldiers came, but the body of the church was entirely
     filled with the gentry. Colonel and Mrs. W. came, and
     brought many of the officers of the 8th. The civilians too,
     were all present. We had upwards of fifty at the Lord’s
     table:--three complete tables. Among them the above and
     Dr. M., Captain and Mrs. E., Mr. G. S. and Harrington of
     the 53rd, with many of the soldiers beside the society....
     There were three more admitted to the society on Friday
     night. On Sunday one part of the 53rd were marched to
     Church. At two, I therefore went to the school-room of the
     8th, and about thirty came. One of them has lately been
     several times to the Church: several of them were disposed
     to be attentive. S. had a number of the religious men at
     dinner. Harrington dined with us, and after dinner we went
     over and staid awhile at S.’s. It was a very happy time....
     Mr. G. has been reading Newton on the Prophecies, and
     has now Edwards on Redemption. This, with his attendance
     yesterday, and general sobriety, looks well. Captain G. and
     P. are both unwell; E. is better: I fear his impressions
     are gone; B. has been unwell too; perhaps you do not know
     him, he is an acquaintance since you left. Indeed, I have
     seen them almost all, but have not been at the mess.

     “Yesterday I baptised my little boy by the name of Osman
     Daniel.[71] The child afterwards was reading the Gospels
     almost all day. I have not shewn your _muvishtee_ to
     Fitrut. He has got to the end of Joshua, and does on an
     average more than two chapters a day. Beside that without
     your reviewing his work, it will be but little worth; and
     if he were doing it by task work, it would be still more
     incorrect. The first discontent he shewed was only the
     usual policy of an Indian to try how far his influence
     extended; I took no notice of it, but positively refused
     his demands; and for two or three weeks made no inquiry
     after him, on which he came entirely into the old plan. He
     comes every day, and we translate a collect or two: and in
     this way I shall have the Prayer book, as well as the Bible
     translated. We have begun a little work of Mrs. Sherwood’s
     also, in the manner of the Pilgrim’s Progress, which I tell
     him, he shall receive some gratuity for doing. This seized
     upon him instantly, and he would fain have taken the book
     with him; but I would not allow that, lest the greater work
     be hindered.”

Mr. Corrie’s private reflections on the religious services mentioned
above, were as follow:

     “25th. [Dec. 1810] A large attendance at church, and above
     fifty attended at the Lord’s table. O may their souls be
     nourished by grace divine! My own heart all the morning
     unfeeling and hard, during the whole of divine worship;
     and at dinner on going to S.’s. to see their party of
     godly men, and joining in a hymn with them, my soul melted
     under a sense of the Lord’s grace and love to me. O may
     this impression remain; and may its constraining influence
     attend me! Prepare me for my evening work, O Lord the
     Spirit, Amen!”


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                        “Cawnpore, Dec. 26, 1810.

     “I send enclosed a letter to Martyn; if he is gone to sea,
     you will peruse it, and send it after him. The account of
     Fitrut and the translation, you are concerned in, as much
     as he is, and I shall give you an account of our progress
     from time to time. We are all here very busy in one way or
     other, but with all our bustle we should not be missed if
     taken away from the face of the earth. I trust, however,
     some seed is sowing, that may spring up another day. The
     half-caste lad, I have had now a year, during which,
     not one instance of misconduct has come to my hearing.
     Yesterday he seriously devoted himself to the work of a
     Missionary, after a free choice, on my part, given him, to
     be a writer, or any thing else, I could serve him in. He
     has begun to-day to learn Latin from Lieut. Harrington,
     who is teaching one of the officer’s sons, and an orphan
     European boy, Latin. He is now about eighteen; he is
     reading and writing Persian too, and learning to translate
     into Hindoostanee his native tongue. The other native boys
     make considerable proficiency. I keep a strict hand over
     them.”

On the first day of the new year, Mr. Corrie again wrote to Mr.
Martyn, but it was chiefly about private matters. The letter,
however, to Mr. Brown, which enclosed that to Mr. M. is of more
general interest.


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                         “Cawnpore, Jan. 1, 1811.

     “I send another note for Martyn. He tells me you must
     wait for paper from England before you can print the
     Hindoostanee. The late arrivals in our department are not
     favourable specimens of their labours at Cambridge and
     Leadenhall street. They are frightened, I fancy, by the
     Twinings,[72] &c.: but yet what can they do if men will
     not offer themselves? During my late journeys in these
     parts, I observed the idol-temples and the mosques, in
     most places falling to decay, and with little appearance of
     being frequented. Here and there a rich underling of some
     of the Company’s servants has retired and built a pagoda
     to commemorate his ill-gotten wealth; but in general,
     the spirit and fury of idolatry does not appear. I have
     thought much, if the time were but come for the labourers
     to enter in, the gospel would not fail to be attended to.
     But where are the labourers? At best, I was never but an
     under-servant, and now my hands are full of Europeans:
     and the Company’s Chaplains will always be so, unless
     there were more of them. May we have more of the spirit of
     prayer, that the Lord may ‘give the word,’ and then ‘great
     shall be the company of the preachers!’

     “I have very little comfort in the work of the ministry
     among the Europeans. I consider it always a secondary
     consideration, yet how to be doing it more for the heathen,
     I know not. At Agra, I suppose there may be greater
     opportunities; but Martyn will not hold up many months
     under the duties of this station, so I hope to be continued
     with him.”

The following extract from his Journal informs us of Mr. Corrie’s
private occupations and purposes:--

     “January 2nd, 1811. I am much occupied in reading Greek,
     and other exercises, tending, I hope, to mutual benefit
     with H., but let me not deceive myself in fancying it all
     duty, when it is all so agreeable. The children have made
     considerable progress during the past year: as much as I
     could expect. James has begun Latin, under the express idea
     of becoming a teacher of others: and may he have grace to
     give himself willingly to this work! I am very much taken
     up with schemes for the furtherance of the gospel; but
     little is yet done. The Europeans require more time and
     labour than I have to give [to them.] Blessed be God for
     some success among them. O may they [who fear God] increase
     in number! During the year, my proficiency has been very
     scanty: some knowledge of the history of this country, some
     proficiency in Hindoostanee; the Hindoostanee catechism:
     these are my chief employments, beside my ministry among
     the Europeans. I purpose to be more in the study of these
     languages, more in writing sermons, more attentive to
     the children; to translate the Pilgrim’s Progress, the
     Prayer book, and any other work that may be useful to the
     children. Lord, direct my steps, and make me an instrument
     of good for Jesus’ sake, Amen!”

It will be recollected that, in consequence of a sermon which Mr.
Brown preached on New-year’s day, 1810, an important effort was made
to supply the Christians of Tanjore with Bibles. Encouraged, it would
seem, by the success which attended that effort, Mr. Martyn, whilst
in Calcutta was induced to occupy Mr. Brown’s pulpit on the 1st of
January, 1811, for the purpose of making “An appeal on behalf of
900,000 Christians in India who were in want of a Bible.” This Sermon
not only produced a lasting effect on those who heard it delivered,
but having been printed and widely circulated, called forth among the
Europeans in India, a strong feeling of sympathy in behalf of the
native Christians, and contributed mainly towards the formation of
an Auxiliary Bible Society in Calcutta. It is to these circumstances
that allusion is made in the following letter; although the Auxiliary
Society was not actually formed till the 21st of February.[73]


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                        “Cawnpore, Jan. 28, 1811.

     “I am much pleased with the idea of an Auxiliary Bible
     Society. I wonder the thought had not occurred before. When
     we receive Martyn’s sermon I hope we shall be able to get
     you help from this [place]. I have mentioned the sermon
     in several places, and it will be read here with great
     eagerness. We have no support from our new General: he sets
     but a very indifferent example to the community, whilst
     he is quiet and civil enough in private. ‘To the poor the
     gospel is preached,’ and they receive it, though not in
     great numbers.

     “I have had five long journeys since November, and expect
     to go to Bareilly next week to attend two marriages. At
     the other end of the cantonments I have lately begun to
     assemble the Light Dragoons on a Thursday evening. At first
     many came, and a few still continue to attend. Most of our
     Hymn-books are distributed, and numbers of the Bibles, but
     few of the New Testaments....

     “I am at present in very good health, and strong to labour.
     We have service three times on Sundays, and on Wednesday,
     Thursday, and Friday evenings. The distance between the
     two European regiments, makes double labour, but (blessed
     be God!) it is not labour in vain. And whilst there is no
     service that could well be dispensed with I can do nothing
     better than patiently ‘spend and be spent,’ while strength
     remains. Even now the hospitals are sadly neglected, but
     the godly men, and especially Harrington, supply the lack
     with great diligence.”

Of the journey to Bareilly (about 170 miles distant from Cawnpore)
there is a short notice in Mr. C’s Journal, dated,

     “February 21st. I have had a journey to Bareilly. H. went
     with me to Futtyghur. I have reason to bless God for
     preservation from angry tempers during the journey, and
     for the much sweet converse I had with H. In riding along,
     our manner was to read a sentence from a book, and to
     converse upon it; or sing a hymn. In this way weariness
     was prevented, and my heart often burned within me. Let me
     however watch and pray that the things which I have wrought
     be not lost. O, may I never be suffered to faint or grow
     weary in the heavenly way! My inward frame and spirit is
     sadly prone to this. I have to drag this ‘body of sin’
     along with me. How often would my spirit sit down to rest;
     or, wearied with the constant load, yield to the death!
     Lord, preserve and uphold me to the end! Amen.”

During the two months following the date of this extract, Mr. Corrie
was chiefly occupied with the ordinary clerical duties at Cawnpore.
Besides these however, he did not cease to employ himself in urging
on the translation of the Old Testament into Hindoostanee, which
Mirza Fitrut had commenced under the superintendence of Mr. Martyn;
and Mr. C’s correspondence about this time shews him, also, to have
been actively engaged in furthering the objects contemplated by the
Calcutta Bible Society, and in collecting subscriptions for it. Thus
in a letter to Mr. Brown, Mr. C. observes,

                                                  “April 8, 1811.

     “I wrote to Fitrut on the receipt of your last. He sends
     word, that he is unwell, but will come over soon. I expect
     him daily, but suppose he will raise obstacles. The copy
     of Martyn’s sermon which Mr. T. sent me, has not been at
     home a day since it arrived. Applications from all hands
     are daily made for it. The people are astonished at the
     _number_ of Christians in India. Whilst they have been
     objecting to conversion, behold a harvest is already
     gathered! I have the promise of many subscriptions,
     chiefly, indeed, from those who have not much to give; but
     till I can tell them all about you in Calcutta, I know not
     exactly on what ground to ask for subscriptions.”

And, again, in a letter to Mr. Brown, during the same month:--

     “By Fitrut’s desire I send you the enclosed. Before it
     arrives, you will have determined on his request. He is
     now ready to set off, but that I do not choose absolutely
     to promise the increase of salary he wishes for. In the
     meantime, he is going on translating, and he comes every
     morning for an hour or two, to superintend my translations
     also. No _banghy_ has yet arrived with sermon &c., but Col.
     P. has written to Lieut. L., assistant commissary here,
     requesting his aid and exertions for the Bible Society. He
     sent a sermon and a copy of the proceedings, &c.[74] Mr.
     Lumsdaine, accordingly, is getting subscriptions from his
     friends. The general has given 200 rupees, and the plan of
     the society is generally approved. The public attention
     has been greatly excited, and our friends here thought it
     advisable to give the subject all the publicity possible;
     so yesterday, I gave notice from the pulpit, that on Sunday
     next, I shall preach a sermon on the subject of the Holy
     Scriptures, and state the views of the society lately
     formed in Calcutta, in aid of the British and Foreign Bible
     Society in London, &c. I had before waited on Mr. L. and
     agreed to act in concert. Thus, more advantage to the cause
     is likely to arise than we ever hoped for; we want only
     copies of proceedings, &c., to gratify the attention thus
     far excited, before it subsides.

     “The religious men of the 53rd., I understand, mean to
     give each a month’s pay. They say, they have before been
     called upon for a month’s pay, to help to carry on the war,
     much more will they contribute ‘to the help of the Lord
     against the mighty.’ I have great reason for thankfulness
     for the acceptance the word of God has among us. The church
     is usually crowded in the part allotted to the gentry,
     and our societies increase considerably. Even the wild
     Irish Roman Catholics of the 8th Light Dragoons, pay great
     attention, and the Thursday evenings attendance increases.
     A sergeant, his wife, and several others of them, appear in
     good earnest seeking salvation. The Company’s Europeans are
     the least attentive, and indeed, with a few exceptions, the
     Company’s officers are the least constant at church. I have
     a Hindoostanee congregation of nine, every morning, and am
     going through the Epistles with them. The half-caste lad
     I have mentioned, has began to read to them. He continues
     to give good hope that his heart is in the work; and the
     children also, continue improving. I am often greatly
     exhausted from the frequent public services, and feel often
     much inward weakness. Should I ever be relieved from this,
     I would try to get to sea for a few weeks, just recruit
     strength, and prevent the frame from giving way entirely.
     I have many thoughts about Benares; if you send the copies
     of proceedings to E., I fear he will never distribute
     them. You should send some to Robinson. I am desirous to
     see the proceedings of Martyn, when you can spare his
     letter. You cannot suppose how widowed I feel from his
     absence.... Mr. Y. tells me there is a Bible Depository in
     Calcutta. Who has the charge of it? I have been applied to
     for information about it, but could give none.... To-day,
     I have a letter from Martyn dated 19th March, ‘Bombay,’
     containing extracts from Simeon, on _not_ taking fees, far
     more pointed than his cautions to P.”

But assiduously occupied as Mr. Corrie thus appears to have been in
furthering every plan that promised to yield moral benefit to his
fellow-men, he was nevertheless alive, at the time, to the importance
of watching over the state of religion in his own soul. On the
anniversary of his birth-day he writes:--

     “April 10th. This day I am thirty-four. It was the night
     I heard of my mother’s death, February 1798, that I first
     remember my resolutions made to be religious. Till the
     summer of 1801, I went on sinning and repenting, as I
     thought; but quite ignorant of the author and finisher of
     salvation. In the latter end of that year, my views of
     scripture truth became more distinct; and, since then,
     I have gone on my way, ‘looking unto Jesus;’ but every
     year has brought me, it should seem, only experience
     of my own depravity. True, I have experience of ‘the
     Lord’s mercy,’ too, in that I am ‘not consumed;’ and the
     fulness, freeness, and efficacy of the ‘fountain opened’
     to purify my guilty soul is so fully known to my soul,
     and my own hope in that ‘blood shed for the remission
     of sins,’ so stayed, that my own guilt does not dismay
     me, as it otherwise might well do: at the same time, one
     propensity after another to evil starts up so unavoidably,
     that doubtless, my soul is ‘full of wounds, and bruises,
     and putrifying sores:’ to Thee, therefore, O divine
     Physician, do I turn my fainting eyes. I come to Thee for
     healing, that it would please Thee to cast the salt of
     Thy grace into this impure fountain, that the streams may
     be purified from the noxious qualities, which now render
     unfruitful the whole field of the soul. O Lord, I pray
     that the overflowings of sin may be restrained; teach me
     to watch and pray; quicken me to diligence in this work,
     and service; enable me to ‘give attendance to reading, to
     exhortation, to doctrine;’ to ‘give myself wholly to them,
     that my profiting may appear’ in the edification of thy
     people, through the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ!”

     “June 10th. This day nine years ago, I was ordained a
     deacon; and on the twelfth of June, two years after, a
     priest. I have sinned grievously in respect of personal
     holiness; and, during the last year, also, I fear, as
     much as ever. I know not what to do against my strong
     foe, ‘whose name is legion.’ The Lord knows I purpose
     perpetual enmity with every sin; and, I think, if it were
     the will of God to take away every disposition to evil,
     I should rejoice; but, at the same time, should require
     such measures of grace to keep me humble, as seem out of
     the way of God’s usual method to bestow. Indeed, when I
     feel such a disposition to self-importance in a very short
     time, if my evil dispositions are quiet, what devilish
     pride should I not be puffed up with, if my heart were
     freed from corruption. Blessed be God, I can say, that no
     sin hath dominion over me; yet do I not justify myself:
     though I am often surprised, and get a spiritual fall, yet
     the enemy cannot keep me down: by faith I rise, by faith I
     stand; and ‘in the Lord have I righteousness and strength.’
     I have been at Cawnpore about a year; and since October
     have had the whole charge: ten are added to the (religious)
     society since then; and several are enquiring after the
     ways of godliness. Some of the light dragoons, (especially
     sergeant R.) are, I hope, seriously impressed. Gracious
     God, I praise Thee for these fruits! I have to mourn my
     unprofitableness among the better sort. I think I am not
     suited to do good by much visiting, and, therefore, stay
     at home. I have been employed a great deal in translating
     for the children; and Nicholas is very hopeful: these in
     all are six, besides those who came yesterday. God of all
     grace, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, give me a
     larger portion of the Holy Spirit’s grace: make me holy
     in body, soul, and spirit; ‘holiness becometh thy house.’
     O Lord, my soul is athirst for holiness. Teach me how to
     preach holiness through the Spirit, and by the Saviour!
     But, I am forbidden by the doctors to preach, on account
     of this liver. May I pray the more for the souls around
     me: O for a spirit of grace and supplication! To Thee, O
     Lord, have I dedicated myself; at thy table, yesterday,
     did I give myself away to Thee; and, though the watchful
     enemy robbed me of part of the benefit, yet, I know, thou
     hast accepted me: Thou didst sit at thine own table; it
     was a season of refreshment to many, as well as to myself;
     about fifty attended; in the evening, a large congregation.
     I hope soon to establish worship for the Hindoostanees;
     James, I trust, is fully bent on this work, though he has a
     good deal of youthful levity about him. Lord, bless all my
     flock, my dear family, and friends! Bless my soul, O Lord,
     and let my soul praise Thee at all times!”

The following letter to Mr. Simeon, whilst giving a general outline
of the religious condition of Cawnpore, as presented during Mr.
Corrie’s ministrations at that station, explains also, the lofty,
self-denying principle on which both Mr. Martyn and himself had
decided to waive the accepting of any fee for the celebration of
marriages, &c.

                                         “Cawnpore, June 4, 1811.

     “As your Indian friends are, at this time, widely
     separated, I shall not be likely to trouble you with
     repetition of intelligence from this quarter, and I know
     you will take part in the hopes and fears attending the
     work of the ministry in this place. You will, I hope, hear
     from Mr. Martyn himself from Persia; the last I heard of
     him was from Bombay, March 19th. He had benefited little,
     or nothing, from the change. Since his departure, I have
     had much encouragement in my work. I began with a very
     discouraging impression of my unfitness to stand up in
     his place, but the word delivered in weakness, has been
     attended with power to several. Ten have been added to the
     religious society, and several are on probation, in one
     of the European Regiments; in the other, some good has
     been done, and even from among the Company’s Artillery-men
     (surely the most hardened against all good, of any set of
     men I ever saw) five are become regular attendants at the
     Lord’s Table. We might have hoped for more abundant fruit;
     but that it was the Divine will I should be laid up a third
     time with the liver, and obliged to desist from all labour
     but the Sunday’s duty. I am now so affected with mercury,
     that I cannot appear next Sunday, but I am happy to say,
     that for several days the pains have left me, and I trust
     the disease has subsided. I hope the life, thus repeatedly
     renewed to me, will be more than ever devoted to the work
     of the ministry, for truly I find no life like living to
     Christ. His service is perfect freedom and a great reward!

     “My absence from the Irish regiment has been most felt;
     as in the English regiment, one of the officers, a nephew
     of the late Dr. Elliston of Sidney College, has supplied
     my lack of service, by reading &c., having ‘first given
     himself unto the Lord.’ We have every Wednesday evening
     a party of friends, who take sweet counsel together. It
     consists, when altogether, of a Lieutenant of Dragoons
     and his wife, the Paymaster of the 53rd and his wife, an
     Assistant Surgeon, the above Lieutenant, my sister, and
     a young lady who is living with her; we sometimes have
     beside, another Surgeon and his lady, who have been brought
     up among religious people; an officer on the staff here,
     and, now and then, a friend from the country; and there are
     others, who approve and are hopeful, though they do not yet
     care to come out from the world. When we thus happily meet,
     we are encouraged to think, the whole world must speedily
     bow before the word of the Lord; but, alas, we return again
     with the complaint of Melancthon. The multitude, alas,
     tread heedlessly the broad way!

     “You will know of the formation of an Auxiliary Bible
     society in Calcutta. It has raised ‘no small stir about
     that way.’ Here we have had good success, but the enemy
     also has been at work. My application to the Commander
     of one of the corps here, was yesterday returned, with
     many concessions as to the purity of our motives, but
     representing this new association as the most dangerous
     thing imaginable, and praying me, and others, to desist
     from promoting the objects of it. In two entire regiments,
     out of the five, we have been thus hindered, but blessed
     be God, we have a majority, even in point of numbers. One
     undeniable benefit has arisen from it, even to the English;
     for after a sermon I preached on the subject, April 28th,
     we had a greater number of applications for English Bibles,
     than for many months together before.

     “During this month my school of Christian boys has
     increased to nine. I hear them myself twice a day, and
     find they learn even quicker than many English boys. Some
     of the parents, seeing how desirous I am to retain these
     children at school, plague me not a little for money to
     support themselves also, saying they must otherwise remove
     to some other place, and take their children with them. The
     Christian man I left at Chunar, has within these few days
     arrived here, having left his charge. The house I fitted
     up, is still used for public worship by the Europeans, but
     no one pities my poor black flock, so they are again left
     in the wide wilderness. A few of them, who have, I trust
     been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
     of the good word of God, attend the service in English,
     though they understand nothing of what is said, yet they
     hear the name of ‘_Jesu Kreesht_,’ and, that, they say,
     ‘is pleasure.’ At this place there are many Christians of
     Portuguese descent, but, in language and manners, quite
     Hindoostanees. Through two of my Christian people, who,
     I trust, are real Christians, a desire has been excited
     among them for hearing and reading the Scriptures. The
     youth I have mentioned, of European descent, is with me
     still, and very promising. I hope to establish worship in
     Hindoostanee, in a month’s time, for the above native
     christians here, and to make this lad officiate. If I were
     able to officiate myself, I would not set him so forward
     yet, but our friends here advise that, considering the
     difficulty of again putting affairs in the train they now
     are, we had better secure the present opportunity, and
     hope and pray that the Lord will be with us, till Martyn’s
     return, when he will find the way he had prepared, somewhat
     carried forward, and may enlarge it after, as he judges
     proper. He had addressed himself to the multitude at large
     who used to assemble every Sunday evening, on his lawn,
     till his health and strength were exhausted. My health and
     strength have been brought nearly as low, though I have a
     stronger constitution to renew upon; so I set the above
     servants to work at the houses of individual Christians,
     and now hope to establish a small congregation from among
     them, against our brother’s return.

     “From Bombay, M. sent me a part of a letter of your’s, on
     the subject of fees, which he desired me to consider. I
     beg leave to state a few particulars on that subject for
     your information. First, all in the army, below the rank of
     Captain, are obliged to use the strictest economy, in order
     to maintain a family. A Captain may live without care,
     but, if it be considered that he must send his children to
     England for education, it will be easily believed, that
     every married military man, who has a family, is likely to
     be poor to the end of his service, with the exception of a
     few, who get staff-appointments, and they are almost the
     only ones who are ever able to return home. When we are
     sent for to a distance, the expences of travelling are paid
     by the parties, which usually costs from forty to sixty
     pounds. It is usually the younger officers who marry, for
     the old ones almost all live in sin: and indeed from the
     above circumstances, together with the few opportunities of
     religious instruction, most of the young ones too; and some
     have told me plainly, that they could get nobody to marry
     them, and if they could, they had not money to give, as
     was usually expected by the Chaplains. For these causes,
     from the first, I wished to decline being an obstacle in
     the way of any. Sometimes young men marry the daughters of
     old Indians by native mothers, but though the father could
     often give a fee in this case, he has himself sacrificed
     conscience to money, and thinks any one would do the same,
     and how are we to convince him to the contrary, but by
     refusing his money? The civilians who marry, are also
     usually of the younger part, and have nothing to spare
     without borrowing, which they can do indeed too easily.
     The elder civilians are altogether as preposterously paid
     to excess, and indeed there are very few of them, who are
     not in consequence, so vain, and carry themselves so high,
     that I know not how we can shew them the folly of trusting
     in these things, but by refusing the opportunities of
     obtaining them. On this head, there will he difference of
     opinion, but my humble judgment is, to renounce the fee,
     to convince them by all possible means, that a man’s life
     consisteth not in these things. In so doing, we are not
     injuring our successor, because he has a sufficiency of
     income for all the purposes that his station in life can
     require. I suppose you do not care whether we be able to
     keep a carriage, or not, if we should ever return; and
     suppose we save but enough to pay our passage to England,
     the retiring pension is an abundant provision for our
     necessities. I suppose, that even a chaplain marries, and
     has children, then even he has plenty to educate them,
     though his usefulness here may be thereby confined, and
     in what situation would it not be so? I see no motive for
     receiving fees that ought to be entertained a moment, but
     that of taking them to give to the poor, and such has been
     the state of things among the British here hitherto, that
     the mention of such a motive would have excited derision,
     as mere hypocrisy. It has never been conceived, that a man
     came to India, except to make money. After all, dear Sir,
     we have no such thing as a regular fee; we are military
     chaplains, and the general could order us to officiate, in
     any part of the district, there being no legal impediment:
     _you_ can recover the accustomed offering by law; _we_ have
     no law on the subject, nor do the soldiers ever, on any
     occasion, offer a fee. We have indeed custom on our side,
     but it is a custom that has made the name of Chaplain an
     offence. Would government but appoint a regular supply of
     Chaplains, and let any reasonable fee be appointed, for
     occasional duties, as a part of their subsistence, it would
     be well. O, I wish that some of the young men around you,
     did but see the different stations of India, where numbers
     of their countrymen are actually falling into the jaws of
     infidelity and deism, for the want of some one merely to
     remind them of the customs and opinions of their native
     land. They come out boys; they leave the Sabbath and public
     worship behind them; they straightway fall into sinful
     habits, and grow to argue for that, which they would once
     have blushed to mention. But what, if the young clergy
     knew, and pitied, and were willing to come over and help
     us, what could they do whilst the way is shut against them?
     Consider, this district contains, I know not the exact
     number, but I know twelve subordinate stations, at each
     of which, there will be from twenty to forty English and
     native Christians in the Company’s service; at Allahabad,
     one hundred miles to the east, there are about two hundred
     Europeans alone; at Futtyghur eighty miles to the west,
     there are at least as many, and at Bareilly not much less
     than a hundred. To these places, the Chaplain of Cawnpore
     must go, to celebrate marriages, for this is the only
     duty he cannot be dispensed with for; but as to all other
     religious services, they are left entirely destitute, and
     from the long habits of indifference they have been in, it
     is not always, even when we do go, that we can have public
     worship. O, dear Sir, ought the immense revenues of this
     fruitful land to be wholly appropriated to the purposes of
     merchandize! Ought the souls of our own countrymen, not to
     speak of the natives, to be weighed in the balance against
     bales of silk and cotton! Surely this system will have an
     end!

     “Mr. Thomason was so kind as to send me some Christian
     Observers, with the paper war with the Christian
     Advocate.[75] These are exceedingly interesting to us, and
     you cannot confer a greater favour, than by forwarding to
     this country, supplies of Christian Guardians, Eclectic
     Reviews, Christian Observers, &c. We can lend them about,
     they are read with avidity, and excite much conversation
     about religious books.

     “I hope this will find you renewed in the outer, as well as
     in the inner man. The Lord can send by whom he will, but
     my soul would mourn to hear, that that candlestick, which
     was the means of guiding me into divine light and peace,
     was removed from Cambridge. May your latter days, dearest
     Sir, be more blessed than the former, and when heart and
     strength shall fail, may you have the assurance in your own
     soul, that God is the strength of your heart, as well as
     the portion you have chosen for ever!

     “If there were to be a quantity of copies of the Christian
     Guardian sent out yearly, they would be eagerly purchased
     by the religious soldiers, and would be highly useful. The
     Christian Observer is above their modes of thinking.


       [70] Mr. Martyn and Mr. Corrie had agreed to decline
            all fees for the solemnizing of marriages, &c. The
            reasons for their decision on that matter are given
            at length in a letter to Mr. Simeon, dated June 14,
            1811.

       [71] A little boy who was rescued from death, during a
            famine, and brought up by Mr. C.

       [72] Twining was the name of the gentleman who was for
            expelling all Missionaries from India. See above p.
            119.

       [73] History of the Bible Society, vol. ii. pp. 108, and
            seq.

       [74] The Calcutta Auxiliary Bible Society printed 1000
            copies of the first six Reports of the Parent
            Society, for circulation in India.

       [75] Dr. E. Pearson, Master of Sidney Sussex College,
            Cambridge, between whom and Mr. Simeon, some
            Pamphlets were exchanged on the subject of Mr.
            Simeon’s preaching.




                             CHAPTER IX.

                 CAWNPORE--COEL--RETURN TO CALCUTTA.


The illness which Mr. Corrie mentions in the foregoing letter, as
having ‘obliged him to desist from all labour, except the Sunday
duty,’ now continued to increase upon him; so that, in the beginning
of July he was not only laid aside from duty, but confined to the
house. From his Journal it appears, also, that he suffered greatly
from the exhaustion consequent on fever; and that he was much
harassed by impatience and a nervous irritability of temper. Added to
this, Mr. C., states himself to have been distressed by the ‘mournful
view,’ which his mind took ‘of the desolate state of professing
Christians in India, scattered as sheep upon the hills.’ With the
hope, therefore, of recruiting both health and spirits, he spent a
fortnight or more on the river. His correspondence at the same time,
shews that the pressure of bodily sickness did not prevent Mr. C.,
from occupying his mind with plans for the permanent welfare of India.


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                        “Cawnpore, July 11, 1811.

     “Since I wrote to you, I have been entirely laid aside.
     A fever seized me, and I thought I was following Des
     Granges;[76] but after some days, through divine mercy, it
     left me, exceedingly weakened, so that although now, in my
     own opinion, able to officiate in public, those about me
     will not let me.

     “I had a letter from Martyn, dated 24th. April, at Muscat.
     He gets no stronger, I fear; but you will have heard from
     him yourself: I begin greatly to wish him back again. Since
     I have been confined to the house, Mr. Sherwood and Mr.
     Harrington have, in turns, read to the people in church of
     an evening. I am much gratified by this help; it relieves
     my mind greatly. At the same time the numbers fall off. The
     _preaching_ of the Cross is the usual means of salvation. I
     am well aware that none of my sermons can be compared with
     those they read, in point of composition, &c. and yet the
     people go to sleep under them; and those who shewed some
     love begin to ‘wax cold.’ I wish, therefore, to renew my
     public work, that ‘through the foolishness of preaching,’
     some may believe and be saved.

     “My Moonshee, as you will expect, is on the way to
     Serampore, he left this [place] near a fortnight ago.
     Fitrut alarmed him greatly at last, by telling him that
     he knows Sabat is his great enemy, and that nothing but
     disgrace and loss of character will ensue to him. Fitrut
     is himself gone to Lucknow, he is at work on the Psalms,
     having passed by Esther and Job; he has given in as far as
     the 37th. The translation is, in general, very excellent.
     I hope that the Psalms, when properly corrected, will be
     printed separately; no good will be done to any extent,
     till the Scriptures are printed; therefore, God be thanked
     for the Calcutta Auxiliary Bible Society! Y. told me of the
     opposition to the measure at Madras. ‘It must needs be that
     offences come, but woe to that man by whom they come.’ I
     expect there will be a ‘Hue and Cry’ raised by the opposers
     at home to this society: but it is founded on a rock.

     “I have been thinking much about a representation being
     made to somebody or other at home, (perhaps the Archbishop
     of Canterbury), on the subject of the want of Chaplains
     in India. As everything is in a state of tranquillity
     here, and the revenues [are] flourishing, perhaps it
     might be attended to. At Allahabad there ought to be a
     Chaplain, and at Futtyghur, and at Rewaree and Kurnaul.
     At Allahabad there are always two companies of Artillery,
     and a large society besides; and at Rewaree, and Kurnaul
     about the same. At Futtyghur, one company, and a large
     society of Commissioners, Civilians, &c. And at Benares,
     there is certainly need of a chaplain; there should also,
     at Cawnpore and Chunar, be one King’s chaplain, at least
     at each station, or an additional Company’s chaplain. I
     am told how little likely such a representation would be
     to produce the desired effect, but there is no saying. If
     you, the senior, were to draw up and sign something of this
     kind, and send it to the juniors for their signatures,
     it appears to me, it would certainly be attended to,
     especially if the King should recover, and the present
     ministers remain in office.

     “15th. on the river. I have been so out of spirits as not
     to be able to write to you as I could wish, so delayed
     sending off this. I ought not however to detain the
     Society’s money. I fear a voyage to sea will be necessary
     to get me quite well. I was reduced so much that the
     doctors made me leave off mercury; but they talk of making
     me begin again to use it, three times a day. They say,
     there is little or no danger in the complaint; it may be
     so, but I would have my ‘loins girded about’ and my ‘lamp
     burning.’ I lament the falling off of the people at church,
     whilst I rejoice I am much comforted by the faith and love
     of the helpers supplied to me.”

But notwithstanding the means used by Mr. Corrie for the recovery
of his health, it pleased God still to afflict him. The medical men
accordingly continued to prohibit his performance of any public duty
for at least six weeks or more. During this cessation from duty, he
took advantage of a summons to marry a couple at Coel, to perform
the greater part of the journey to that place by boat on the river,
and purposed to spend a short time at Coel for the benefit of change
of air. Many days, however, had not passed over before Mr. C. took
cold, and his ‘frame began to sink and his spirits to languish.’
He therefore decided on returning to Cawnpore, and proposed taking
Agra in his way, having been engaged to solemnize a marriage there.
But before he reached Agra, the fever returned upon him with great
violence, so that he was detained on the road and reduced to a state
of extreme debility. Some account of this journey is given in a
letter.


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                          “Coel, August 27, 1811.

     “I made a journey by water to this neighbourhood, and then
     by _dawk_ to this place. We convened the settlement for
     public worship on Sunday, and had evening service with the
     family. They are very kind to me, and I hope I help to
     remove the prejudices of some against the cause we wish to
     serve, by bringing before them sometimes the other side of
     the question about missions. The commanding officer here is
     an intelligent man; he favours the Bible Society, as you
     will know. I have lent him a copy of Martyn’s Hindoostanee
     New Testament: he says that he will have it copied and sent
     to the Portuguese, drummers, &c. He is somewhat acquainted
     with Persian and Arabic, and expresses himself gratified by
     what he has seen of the translation.

     “I ought to have written to Moonshee before this, but for
     a month I have not been near a post-office, except just in
     passing Futtyghur. I am greatly benefited by change of air,
     and hope my little flock are suffering no lack, through the
     kindness of Harrington and Sherwood. But I fear staying
     away longer than needful, and am now anxious to be at
     Cawnpore.

     “Agra, Saturday, 31st. I have had a severe attack of
     illness, which laid me up on the road to this [place]. A
     whole day I was in a wretched Bazaar, and learned something
     of the value of home and friends to a sick man. But my mind
     was undisturbed.

           “Lord, I believe thou hast prepared,
            Unworthy though I be,
            For me a blood-bought, free, reward
            A golden harp for me.”

     “I am confined to Colonel Bowie’s quarters, and was only
     just able last night to marry the young people. I am sorry
     to find the Bible Society has been so little encouraged
     here; but I cannot go out to see people on the subject. The
     surgeon here tells me, I must go to sea.”

Yet after a few days repose, added to God’s blessing on the kind
attentions of his host at Agra, Mr. Corrie was sufficiently recovered
to allow of his proceeding on his journey, and before his arrival at
Cawnpore he found himself much recruited in strength. As, however,
he seems now to have been convinced, that his illness was chiefly to
be attributed to the frequency of his preaching; Mr. C. considered
it to be his duty to resolve to be more careful in that respect for
the future. Still, with reference to that matter he remarks in his
Journal:--

     “I trust it is with a single eye to future usefulness that
     I purpose to be more careful of my health, and to be less
     engaged in preaching.”

But when he was again settled among his flock at Cawnpore, Mr. C’s
purpose to be “less engaged in preaching,” was but partially carried
into effect. He writes, for example, under date of

     “18th. Sept. [1811.] I have been thinking of three
     separate courses of sermons. First, for Sunday mornings:
     to begin with man’s ruin; justification; illumination;
     separation from the world; progress in the ‘fruits of the
     Spirit.’ Secondly, for the Wednesday evenings: a view of
     the church of Christ; its establishment; progress; and
     final triumph in the world, notwithstanding the opposition
     of Satan: a course from Matt. xvi. 18., on the plan of
     Edward’s History of Redemption. Thirdly: to translate into
     Hindoostanee, to be read by James to the Hindoostanees, a
     Commentary on Genesis i: on the original state of man; the
     fall; the promise in succession, on to the history of our
     Lord in the gospels.”

And, again, in a letter:


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                        “Cawnpore, Oct. 10, 1811.

     “I could put twenty copies of the New Testament into
     immediate use, and we go on very lamely without them.
     Writing is slow, incorrect, and expensive. Nothing will be
     done to purpose, till we get printed copies in abundance.
     Three of the pious soldiers are learning Hindoostanee,
     that they may, as they say, be able to exhort the heathen.
     One of them is a superior young man, and very humble and
     unobtrusive. He has long wished to be able to talk with the
     Brahmins at a certain pagoda, near the river, where he goes
     often; and purposes reading the New Testament to them, when
     he can get one.[77]

     “The Lord adds to us one by one, according to his promise.
     Since my return, three have joined the society, and all
     walk orderly. Our Hindoostanee worship was well attended
     last Sunday. Moonshee Fitrut is come back from Lucknow; he
     yesterday gave me the 21st. chapter of Proverbs, the Old
     Testament is completed so far. I have given him a place of
     abode on the premises, and done every thing to induce him
     to go on quietly. This work will, I hope, be done in three
     or four months; and, please God to spare Martyn to put the
     finishing hand to it, will be the greatest work, as to
     utility, ever accomplished on this side of India.

     “Beside my other employments, I have now to translate
     from Henry’s Commentary on Genesis, which serves as a
     Hindoostanee sermon on Sundays. I know nothing else you
     will desire to hear of, from this [place.] The miserable
     squabbles which disgust the world at this place, I am happy
     to know little about. Happy privilege to be ‘redeemed from
     a vain conversation,’--to be delivered ‘from the present
     evil world!’ O, for more power to proclaim aloud the year
     of release! My strength increases, but not a third in the
     way of public duty is done, that might be done. I preach
     twice on Sundays, and on Wednesday evening; and meet the
     society on Fridays. I hope to begin my weekly meeting with
     the Dragoons on Thursday next: but I believe it would
     be right for me to leave off, in that case, my present
     Wednesday evening engagement. But the three hospitals are
     sadly neglected; I can only visit those who are very ill.
     I dare not preach in the wards: my breast and side are on
     fire this morning, from last night’s exertion. Yet, the
     cold season being set in, increases my strength, and I have
     no expectation but of doing well enough, until the heat
     commences again.

     “We have had lately a remarkable instance of the freeness
     and fulness of redeeming love, in the case of a soldier’s
     wife, who died here. I am collecting a few particulars
     which I may send you.”

The “particulars” here referred to, do not occur in Mr. C’s
correspondence or Journal; but a notice of an interview he had with a
dying soldier a short time before the preceding letter was written,
may not be omitted:--

     “Yesterday evening I went to the hospital, to visit J. He
     has been ill some time. He considers himself in a decline,
     and indeed, seems to be so; he began by saying, that ‘he
     felt very composed in his mind, looked upon the world as
     done with, and no longer any thing to him, and would be
     happy, if it were the Lord’s will to take him to Himself.’
     I asked him when he supposed the Lord began to make him
     a partaker of His grace? He said, ‘it was at Chunar he
     first began to consider, and there he became somewhat
     enlightened, but lately his mind had become more confirmed
     and strengthened.’ Not wishing him to be deceived, I
     reminded him of some improprieties since he left Chunar:
     he acknowledged ‘that he had been often led astray, and
     found his heart often going wrong; but for these things
     he was heartily sorry, and hoped by the grace of God to
     prevail against them: indeed, for some months past, he had
     been more alive to religion than ever.’ I asked him the
     ground of a sinner’s hope towards God: he replied with some
     cheerfulness, ‘only the Lord Jesus Christ.’ I asked what he
     expected Christ would do for him: he said, ‘to save him,
     and make him a partaker of salvation with the saints in
     glory.’ I pointed out the meaning of the word ‘saint,’ and
     asked him ‘if he considered that Christ, if he saved us,
     would make us holy, and that heaven was the enjoyment of
     a holy God, and therefore, a happy place.’ He said ‘that
     even now he was happy only when sin was subdued within
     him; and to be freed from sin in heaven, would be complete
     happiness.’”

Amid labours such as these, Mr. Corrie writes:


                      TO THE REV. J. BUCKWORTH.

                                        “Cawnpore, Oct. 30, 1811.

     “I am recovering from an illness, that has nearly laid
     me aside, ever since the 24th of April last. The Lord my
     healer, I hope I may say, renews my spiritual strength, as
     the outer man is brought low. It was brought on by undue
     previous exertion. I trust I am taught that this is not the
     Lord’s will. Without a miracle, we cannot hope our flocks
     will be fed with the bread of life after our decease; to
     abide with them is, therefore, most desirable, and to use
     the means for preserving health to minister among them,
     necessary.

     “You will have heard of the establishment of an Auxiliary
     Bible Society in Calcutta. Doubtless the night has passed
     away, and the true light is now arising upon India. Mr.
     Martyn is gone for change of air, hoping to recover
     health, and, perhaps, avoid the threatened beginning of
     a consumption: he was at Shiraz, in Persia, on the 26th
     of June; and is at work on a Persian translation of the
     New Testament. His translation of the New Testament into
     Hindoostanee, is just put to the press; we greatly long for
     this work to appear. You know, he was assisted by a learned
     native,[78] who passed six years in England, and is well
     acquainted with the English language also. The translation
     of the Baptist missionaries into Hindoostanee, is really
     too defective to be useful to any extent. You will not
     accuse me of depreciating their labours: ‘I speak the truth
     in Christ.’ I have the greater part of their work. The
     Christians about me lay it aside, and prefer the parts of
     scripture they have of Martyn’s translation.

     “The above [mentioned] learned native is living on our
     premises, and goes on translating the Old Testament; in any
     difficult passage he consults me about the meaning. He has
     translated to Isaiah, and is now engaged on that book. This
     work, please God to spare Martyn to come back to correct
     it by the Hebrew, will be a glorious work for Hindoostan
     Proper. This part of India is still without a translation,
     except that of the Baptist missionaries. Two of these
     missionaries have gone to Agra: I was there lately and saw
     them; they had not then got quite settled. The natives
     of that quarter are very independent and fierce in their
     manners, the Mahomedans especially. You have heard of the
     population of India, but can have no idea of its immensity
     unless you saw it; so that a man may visit I cannot tell
     how many villages of three hundred, four hundred people and
     upwards, in a circle of six or eight miles: there seems,
     therefore, little need of itinerating according to your
     idea of the word; but you may think to how little an extent
     all that the whole of the missionaries now in India can do
     is likely to be felt. Yet the day, I am certain, has dawned
     that will never set till all India shall see the glory of
     the Lord.

     “Of my own proceedings, I have little to say; my native
     school consists of ten; four of whom can say the whole of
     Watts’s scripture catechism (but indeed one of the four
     has just left me to go to his friends who live far away).
     I read the scriptures and prayers in Hindoostanee with
     them in the school-house every morning, and am helped
     greatly in these exercises, by the youth I have mentioned,
     of European descent. Since September, we have had worship
     in Hindoostanee; in church on a Sunday afternoon, fifty
     or sixty native Christians sometimes attend, and usually
     thirty or forty; my own people have learned to sing
     translations of psalms and hymns to English tunes: they are
     very fond of them, though I know the poetry is very poor: I
     hope an Indian Watts may be raised up ere long, to regulate
     the psalmody of the Indian church.

     “You would wish to know what success I perceive in the
     midst of our labours. Of the Europeans, about fifteen or
     sixteen have been added to our society during the last
     year: of the natives, I cannot speak so certainly. One
     servant of our own has been piously inclined sometime,
     and I hope he is now a decided character; and one, whom
     you would call a footman, who used to have all the vanity
     and foppery of that class at home, is become attentive,
     not only to his employment, but serious in worship, and
     diligent in reading at leisure hours. I have a particular
     regard for this youth, and shall greatly rejoice in his
     turning to God: he is married, has good natural talents,
     is of a pleasing appearance; and though one is often
     short-sighted and deceived, I fancy he would make a good
     missionary, if he had a heart to it, which I often pray may
     be granted him.

     “I must not forget to tell you how happy I am at my beloved
     sister’s having commenced a school for native christian
     girls. She has so far mastered the language as to be able
     to read Hindoostanee easily, and to understand it pretty
     well. The little girls work as little girls do at home, and
     say a lesson, and learn the Assembly’s shorter Catechism,
     which I translated long ago, and by frequent corrections
     have got nearly worthy of printing. These things were
     hardly ever thought of for women in this country: now and
     then among the Mahomedans, a woman is found who can read,
     but I have not heard that this is ever the case among the
     Hindoos.

     “At leisure hours, I am abridging Milner’s Church History,
     and have finished the first two centuries, and even
     translated about half the first: the scholars I have had so
     long are growing great lads, and want something now beyond
     mere school-books: one is a promising boy, and the others
     are as children at that age usually are.”

The expectation which this letter shews Mr. Corrie to have
entertained of his recovery from the illness, under which he had been
suffering during the preceding six months, turned out not to be well
founded. Although he had latterly been somewhat more attentive to
his health, yet the disease of the liver now returned upon him with
increased severity, and altogether laid him aside from public duty.
Yet in a letter to Mr. Simeon, dated early in November, 1811, Mr. C.
writes:--

     “One expression in it [a letter from Mr. S.] has brought
     before me an entirely new train of ideas respecting my duty
     in the ministry. You express thankfulness, that you are
     enabled to do the little you do now, compared with former
     exertions. I perceive it is an inexpressible favour to be
     employed in the Lord’s service at all; and instead of being
     uneasy at not being able to do more, I ought to be thankful
     for some health, and inclination to do something; and when
     health is withdrawn, it is as much a duty to _suffer_, as
     in health to do, the Lord’s will. Alas! I seem to arrive so
     slowly at proper views of divine things, that opportunity
     is gone before properly understood.”

With reference to a friend, who after having decided on going to
India as a chaplain, changed his mind, as the time for his leaving
England approached, Mr. Corrie adds:--

     “Mr. L’s family I know, and regret that he has withdrawn
     his hand from the plough. It is true, that the pain of
     separation from relatives, and dear, dear Britain, can
     be known only to those who have endured it; but truly an
     hundred-fold recompense attends it. No one can understand
     the pangs I endured, at times, between the time when first,
     in your rooms, the idea of carrying the gospel to heathen
     lands took possession of my mind, and the period of my
     leaving England. Yet dear as all the places, persons, and
     privileges enjoyed at home still are, I would not return to
     them on any consideration I am at present acquainted with.
     Here the light of the glow-worm even is splendid, so gross
     is the surrounding darkness; and every stone put into moral
     order is so much rescued from chaos.”

The following extract from Mr. C.’s Journal will explain the nature
of the communings which he held, at this time, with his own heart:--

     “Sunday, Nov. 17th. I am prevented this day from
     [attending] public worship. O, that I were more alive to
     the importance of the ministry, and more fitted for the
     sacred duties of it. I do not lament, as I ought, the
     interruption of any duty, nor am humbled, as I ought to be,
     under the mighty hand of God. I think that the world and
     the fear of man have less hold, [of me] but am afraid it
     is more from a spirit of misanthropy than faith. I see the
     folly of natural men: I feel the best of creatures [to be]
     miserable comforters; I fear I despise them, rather than
     look above them to God. How deeply do I perceive and feel,
     that nothing but the power of God can make me ‘a right
     spirit,’ or ‘create in me a clean heart.’ May the Almighty
     God, the Lord, whose office it is to quicken the souls of
     men, renew my whole body, soul and spirit, and command a
     blessing upon those around me, who all need his influence
     as much as I do myself; some to be converted, some to be
     guided in the narrow way; one and all to be fitted for
     heaven!”

The continued absence of Mr. Martyn from India, induced the
government to appoint another chaplain to Cawnpore, without, however,
superseding Mr. M. This, therefore, left Mr. Corrie at liberty to
proceed to Calcutta, for the purpose of recruiting his health. As,
however, it was not unlikely that the new chaplain might think it his
duty to confine his ministrations exclusively to the Europeans at
Cawnpore, it became desirable to provide for the carrying on of those
missionary operations for the instruction of the native christians
and others, which had been originated by Mr. Martyn. The idea of
training up a class of scripture-readers for that purpose, presented
itself to the mind of Mr. Corrie and his friends at Cawnpore: and
in this they seem to have anticipated a project to the same effect
which had been about that time adopted by the Society for Missions
to Africa and the East, at the suggestion of their corresponding
committee in Calcutta.[79] With this purpose in view, therefore, Mr.
and Mrs. Sherwood had for some time been learning the language of the
country, and had been teaching a class of natives and half-castes to
read the Hindoostanee, that these might become readers of the word
of God to their heathen, as well as to their christian brethren. It
was with reference to this, among other matters connected with his
removal from Cawnpore that Mr. C. writes


                        TO THE REV. D. BROWN.

                                         “Cawnpore, Dec. 3, 1811.

     “I do now purpose, D. V. to bend my course to Calcutta,
     at the close of the cold weather; which will be just two
     months from this. A constant head-ache oppresses me, and
     makes it necessary to avoid the violence of the hot winds;
     but I could not be better even in England, at this season,
     than here; and till E. arrives, I cannot move; and he will
     not be here till relieved by the Chaplains from below.
     Your letter of yesterday rejoiced us all exceedingly--the
     reading scheme I had determined to pursue, to the utmost
     of my ability. We had prevented your views on the subject,
     by measures for continuing the gospel here. One of the
     Christian youths that has been with me almost five years,
     has been induced of his own accord to offer himself to
     this work. He seems truly pious, and labours indefatigably
     to qualify himself to teach others. He is about twenty
     years of age, and under the management of the Sherwoods
     will be one of your first readers. Another of the boys is
     better qualified than the above, but is not old enough; he
     gives every evidence of seriousness. Another of the boys
     is as forward in learning; but I have no hope at present,
     that his mind is at all under the influence of what he
     learns. I have seen no occasion for any Committee for the
     management of this affair. Take the whole management of it
     yourself; especially as the less that is said of it among
     the English the better. No one can find fault with me, or
     any individual, for supporting readers; but the Alarmists
     would be up in arms, if they heard of supplies from home,
     appropriated to such a purpose.

     “I know not how to account for the story of the Pilgrim.
     I was asked about such a book by some Natives, when I was
     at Chunar: I think it must be a work of a former Roman
     Catholic Missionary, of whom I have heard, and who seems
     to have been a true Evangelist. I know the Christians of
     Bettiah have a book, written in the way of a Dialogue, in
     which the errors of the Brahmins are refuted. The Pilgrim,
     by Mrs. Sherwood, I translated in part, but Fitrut got so
     angry with it at last, he would not go on; and the copier,
     who is a Hindoo, said he should be obliged to give ten
     rupees in a feast to the Brahmins, to atone for his fault
     in writing such a book.... Fitrut is to-day employed on
     Isaiah lxiii. He has for some time been very much out
     of humour; a perfect comment on the apostle’s words,
     ‘hateful and hating.’ I let him fume, till his ill-humour
     is evaporated, when he becomes humble. He has been in
     to-day, to beg he may go with me to Calcutta. ‘In heaven or
     in earth, he has none but me to depend on; and he cannot
     be happy if I leave him behind.’ I told him I have no
     authority to take him down, and no boat-hire to give him.
     He said, ‘he would pay his own boat-hire, if you should not
     see fit to give it him, when he got to Calcutta.’ I told
     him, ‘he must not expect anything of the kind:’ and so he
     left me. The Roman Catholic Priest is over from Lucknow,
     and seems greatly altered from last year. He now professes
     to be desirous his people should be taught to read the
     Scriptures; and I hope we shall get something established
     under his inspection. It is true he has little appearance
     of serious religion; but he affects at least great
     indifference to the sign of the cross, &c., and may serve
     as a drawer of water for the temple-service. He has taken
     away a copy of Genesis for himself, which, he says, he will
     read and expound in church.”

And in another letter to Mr. Brown, of somewhat later date, Mr. C.
observes:--

     “We have been expecting to hear from you about the reading
     system, and especially we have been longing for news
     about the printing of Martyn’s Translation. Mr. E. is on
     his way to this place, and will be here about the 10th
     proximo. The work we wish to carry on will, I fear, suffer,
     especially among the Light Dragoons. There is a little
     leaven evidently implanted there; some of them begin to
     assemble for reading and prayer; but they are only as
     children beginning to walk, and I see no one to take them
     by the hand: but the Lord will provide. We are got into
     a plan that promises well, if pursued. I say _we_, for
     you know my helpers of the 53rd; and Mrs. D. of the Light
     Dragoons, has been induced to offer herself to superintend
     the school of the Light Dragoons. I have added questions
     and scripture proofs to the Church Catechism, which the
     children are getting off. At Christmas, we had the children
     of both regiments at church, to be catechised, and my
     sister gave them tea and cake. We had several to see them,
     and it was the most festive day that has been known here.
     I am sure I have never felt so attached to any place as
     this; yet it appears to me that I should not remain here.
     The Hindoostanee worship will be carried on under the
     inspection of Mr. and Mrs. Sherwood. The youth I mentioned
     labours diligently to qualify himself for instructing the
     children and women, and appears more and more devoted to
     the work in spirit and in truth. At this time there are
     on these premises (i. e. on Sherwood’s farm) about twenty
     children learning to read the Hindoostanee gospels. We are
     greatly perplexed for books for them, though no time has
     yet been lost with them.

     “I am beginning to pack up Martyn’s books; but have not
     disposed of his house yet. Indeed I am loth to think he
     will not come back to this place; you well know how much
     the funds of the Bible Society may suffer if there be
     no one here to recommend the subject: and, indeed, the
     disposition of the British in these parts, in general,
     towards the evangelization of India, will be no little
     affected by the opinions held at this large station. This
     makes me greatly desire Martyn’s return hither. But have
     you, or has any one in Calcutta, heard from him lately? We
     have begun here to lose our care for the objects of his
     journey, in the care for himself.”

Respecting the progress of the translation, Mr. C. adds:--

     “Fitrut left me about New-year’s-day, for Benares, and
     parted by no means friends. He was at Lucknow, July,
     August, and September: in October he came back and went
     on well with his work till November 20th, he then came to
     say, he wished to go to Benares, I begged him to finish
     Isaiah, of which only a few chapters remained. He wanted
     to borrow money also, which I refused, as I know he is not
     in want, but has many hundred Rupees out at interest. He
     went on sullenly till the end of the year, doing only the
     few remaining chapters of Isaiah. I wished him to have 100
     Rupees for forty chapters, which he refused: so at length I
     was obliged to say, ‘I should expect the whole to be done
     in four months’. He then asked, if his salary was not to
     be continued till Martyn’s return? I told him, if he would
     stay and help me in my Catechisms, &c., his pay should be
     continued, but that I could not think of going on in the
     trifling way he had been doing lately. He then talked of
     applying personally to you, with a vast deal of nonsense
     about sharing in the profits of the Translation, &c. I told
     him, you had not sent for him; that he must not expect
     boat-hire, or any indulgence from you: and thus we parted.
     I have sent him this month’s salary through Mr. Robinson,
     but hear nothing further of him or of his Translation. I
     have got the whole of the Old Testament from him to the end
     of Isaiah, and bound up in small volumes.

     “You will by this time have heard of or seen Mrs. H. They
     were here the first Sunday in the New-year. I preached on
     the uncertainty of life, not knowing she was in church.
     The subject affected her greatly, but she was in a most
     heavenly temper of mind. I fear her end is near. May my end
     be like hers! O, how little can the world spare such lovely
     examples of piety; but he who gave her as a light for a
     season, can raise up other more numerous instruments to
     shew forth His praise.

     “When we shall be able to leave this I cannot say. I have
     five months’ leave of absence from the 10th of February.”

But before Mr. Corrie left Cawnpore, a portion of his European
congregation was called into active service, by some disturbances
in Bundelkund. It was on the day before Christmas-day that he
parted with the soldiers who were members of “the society,” so
often mentioned; and in recording this circumstance, he adds that
many of them were persons whose “light so shone before men,” that,
he trusted “glory was brought to God thereby.” He seems to have
been much depressed in spirit on the occasion; and was made more
deeply sorrowful by the intelligence which reached him early in the
following February, that some of his military friends had fallen in
an unsuccessful attempt to gain possession of Callinger, an extensive
hill-fort, about 150 miles from Cawnpore. Mr. C’s first impulse, on
hearing of this disaster, was to proceed direct from Banda, (where
he then happened to be) to the scene of action, for the purpose of
attending to the wounded men; but being unable to obtain any “help
for the journey,” he reluctantly returned back to Cawnpore. He states
himself, however, to have “felt as if he had neglected his duty; or,
at least, had been sadly deficient in Christian love.” He, therefore,
writes, on the 11th. Feb. 1812:--

     “I had prepared all to set off into Bundelkund on Monday
     [Feb. 9.] when news came of all being settled.

     “God grant that the impression made on some may be
     lasting! And, O, may I have grace to give myself to follow
     the Lord fully, and to be ready to every good word and
     work! I have been considering my unprofitableness this
     morning, and have much reason for deep humiliation.”

And under date of Friday, Feb. 13th. Mr. C. observes:--

     “From the conversation in the Society this evening, it
     appears that most of the men had their minds exercised with
     thoughts of death during the late march. A. H. sent word
     ‘that his mind was more refreshed with the considerations
     of the grace of God, and love of Christ, than ever he
     experienced before; that one morning especially, whilst
     marching along, he felt such a hatred and weariness of sin,
     that the hope of being speedily removed from the seeing,
     hearing, and feeling of it, was highly agreeable to him.’
     Here was real and rational courage.”

The chaplain who had been appointed to supersede Mr. Corrie at
Cawnpore, having arrived toward the end of February 1812, and entered
on the duties of the station, Mr. C. made immediate arrangements for
his journey to Calcutta. He lingered for a short time in the hope of
being able to see some of the soldiers who were expected back from
Callinger, but failing in this, he left Cawnpore on Friday the 28th
of February, having first placed four native youths and a native
Christian reader under the direction of Mr. and Mrs. Sherwood. The
young person of European descent, of whom mention often occurs in
the preceding Journal and letters, accompanied Mr. C. to Calcutta,
in order that he might there follow out the study of Greek and
Latin, with a view to his being afterwards employed as a missionary.
Respecting the religious condition of the native congregation which
Mr. C., left at Cawnpore, he observes, under date of March 1, 1812:--

     “In September last, we began Hindoostanee worship,
     which has been attended sometimes by fifty or sixty,
     but irregularly, and generally by about twenty-five. I
     have read among them Genesis, with the Gospel of St.
     Matthew. Left Goon[80] reading Exodus, and the Acts. I had
     translated Henry’s Commentary on many parts of Genesis,
     which is left with Mrs. S. Some of the women had learned
     more or less of the shorter Catechism, and one the whole
     of it, and had been baptized and married: several of the
     people manifested great concern at my coming away. I ought
     to feel more thankful, and may well have great searchings
     of heart on my own account. I have done much duty as to
     _quantity_, of late; but have much cause for humiliation in
     respect of the formal manner of doing it. O Lord! enliven
     me, and let me be enabled to profit by this journey! Enable
     me to be a witness for Thee in every place; and to fit
     myself for further usefulness by due observation of Thy
     providences! Restore me to health, if it be Thy will, that
     I may shew forth Thy praises!”

As Mr. Corrie was now passing through the scenes of his former
labours, some portions of his Journal are subjoined.

     “March 8. Above Mirzapore, last night, when on shore, I
     observed a Brahmin at his devotions, and wished to enter
     into discourse with him. After some questions, I asked him,
     ‘What benefit he expected from his devotions?’ Another
     Brahmin answered, ‘What but that Narsingha should supply
     food to fill his belly.’ I observed, ‘that many who never
     made _poojah_[81] were supplied with food:’ He said, ‘If
     any would make _poojah_ he might serve us, and we would
     provide for him; but they that lived there by themselves
     made _poojah_, and Narsingha provided for them.’ But I
     asked, ‘In the world to come what do you expect from your
     devotions?’ To this he answered, ‘Who knows what will be in
     the life to come?’ One of my Dandees on this said, ‘Sahib
     asks about your Shasters and your religion: he is a Brahmin
     among the English as you are: he marries, says his prayers,
     and gives to the poor as you do, if not, why should he
     enquire about your religion, who else of the English would
     enquire?’

     “15th March. I have to-day been officiating to the
     congregation in the new Church at Secrole: on going, had
     felt thankful for being permitted to worship in this place,
     and prayed that it might be indeed a house of prayer. O
     may the Lord grant a blessing to his own truth, and bring
     many sons unto glory at Chunar! On Wednesday, had public
     worship at Church for the English and Hindoostanee; many
     attended. I was grieved at the spirit manifested by Mr.
     ----and others there. The bitterness of their spirit is
     what I lament, and their contempt of all subordination. O
     may my own soul be more attentive to obey my Lord in spirit
     and in truth! I seldom enjoy nearness to God: I do not walk
     closely with him, but suffer company, reading, and undue
     indulgence of myself to interfere with time of devotion.
     Lord, I beseech thee to enable me to lay aside every
     weight, and to run, looking unto Jesus!

     “Sunday, March 22nd. At Chunar, Serjeant Williams’ wife,
     on my asking her if she yet knew the way of acceptance
     with God, answered, ‘It is through Jesus Christ: He is,
     indeed, himself the way; and I continue day and night in
     the consideration and expectation of his mercy.’ At Buxar,
     an old woman who seems in a dying state, on my asking her
     how sin could be forgiven, said, ‘Surely in no way but
     through the Lord Jesus Christ; He took our nature upon
     him, and endured suffering and death for our sins, and now
     through the mercy of God we shall be saved.’ I asked her
     what she thought of the employment of heaven? She said ‘She
     should there see the Lord Jesus, and love and worship him
     for ever; and that those who do not love and worship him on
     earth cannot enter heaven.’”

In a letter to Mr. Brown, dated 6th. of April, after mentioning
several of the foregoing particulars respecting the state of things
at Chunar and Buxar, Mr. Corrie adds:--

     “During the short stay I made at Gazeepore, I could find
     never a vestige of dear Martyn’s labours. One man expressed
     great love for his former pastor, but lamented that all are
     fallen into decay. Perhaps the latent spark may again be
     lighted up, if they again come under ‘the joyful sound;’
     but, O, what are they doing at home, that none are found to
     come and help us?”

The recurrence of his birth-day was not forgotten by Mr. C. as an
occasion for self-examination and thanksgiving.

     “April 11th. Yesterday, I was thirty-five years old; the
     day did not pass unnoticed, though I fall sadly short in
     the spirit with which I would serve God at all times. I
     praise Him who hath kept me wonderfully of late, so that
     though I am conscious of many falls, yet he hath raised me
     up, and restored my soul, and made me watchful: I have
     devoted myself anew to the Lord my Saviour, and hope my
     conscience witnesses truly that to me to live is Christ,
     though in no one duty do I live as I ought: the heathen
     especially I would live and die with. I praise God who
     renews my bodily strength: to Him would I surrender myself.
     O give me to live more simply by faith in Jesus, and to
     live a life of closet communion with the Father and the
     Son!”

In a like happy and watchful spirit, Mr. C. continued to pursue his
journey:--

     “Sunday, April 19th. During the last week, I have been
     in the Muta-bangha Nulla,[82] the shore on either side
     presents a gaudy, flattering view; I have in general been
     enabled to keep in mind the harbour of eternity, and trust
     to attain to the desired haven through the abounding grace
     of God the Saviour. This morning I was a good deal favoured
     in prayer; may the savour of thy grace, O Lord, remain with
     me! O how much to be desired are thy courts: how happy the
     men who, with joyful experience of thy grace are always
     praising Thee: one day, O Lord, in thy heavenly sanctuary,
     O how will it blot out the remembrance of all the trials
     and conflicts attending this militant state.

     “Tuesday. From the very winding course of the stream,
     we are not yet at Chinsurah: I hope to reach there this
     forenoon: yesterday I was unable to attend to any thing,
     and am much the same to-day: the journey thus finishes
     miserably. I forget mercies in a manner that ought to
     humble me exceedingly, and become in consequence, a prey to
     temptation. Instead of being thankful for preservation &c.,
     I kick against the hand that upholds me, so that I must
     close with acknowledging it to be ‘of the Lord’s mercy that
     I am not consumed;’ and ‘what shall I render unto the Lord?’

     “22nd. Arrived yesterday about four at Chinsurah, and
     passed the evening with Mr. Forsyth: learned many
     gratifying particulars from him respecting the progress of
     the gospel; and had much profitable conversation on the
     signs of the times. O may I have that preparation of heart
     which is from the Lord, that my journey may not be in vain!
     Thanks to the Lord, who healeth my bodily infirmities; and
     I trust, my spiritual ones also. O may I have grace to give
     myself wholly to him!”


       [76] The missionary mentioned in p. 49, and who died of
            fever at Vizagapatam, July 12, 1810. Hough’s History
            of Christianity in India, vol. iv. pp. 265, &c.

       [77] After relating this circumstance, in a letter to
            Mr. Simeon, Mr. C. adds, “The Edinburgh Reviewers
            need not be alarmed, for he is a man of superior
            understanding, as well as superior piety, and will
            neither profane the temple, nor insult the Brahmins.”

       [78] Mirza Fitrut.

       [79] Proceedings of the Society for Missions to Africa
            and the East, Vol. iii. pp. 238-242, 426.

       [80] A native Christian reader.

       [81] Worship.

       [82] One of the channels which connects the Ganges with
            the Hooghley.




                             CHAPTER X.

                              CALCUTTA.


On the 24th of April 1812, Mr. Corrie arrived in Calcutta, and took
up his abode with Mr. Thomason. He found his friend Mr. Brown in a
very debilitated state of health. During the preceding six months,
Mr. B’s strength had been manifestly failing; but now his illness had
assumed so threatening an aspect, that a sea-voyage was recommended
as the only human means, that promised to ward off the danger of
death. Mr. Brown accordingly consented to make trial of that remedy;
and having expressed a great desire that Mr. Corrie should accompany
him in the voyage, the two friends left Calcutta early in May, and
on the 14th of that month, embarked on board the Dover Castle, with
the intention to visit Madras. The first effect of the sea-air was
beneficial to both. Respecting his friend, Mr. Corrie observed:--

     “Mr. Brown, since his coming on board is much recovered,
     though still very weak. He has, at times a great deal
     of his former wit, and sound sense in conversation.
     He observed, that he had generally found considerable
     scrupulosity attended with little understanding, and some
     defect in morality.”

This record is dated on the 17th of May: and on the 30th, Mr. Corrie
writes:--

     “Many events have taken place since writing the above,
     which I would remember. We lay at Saugur till the 23rd.
     during that time I was much occupied about Mr. B. and
     cabins, &c. I had time, however, to get near some of
     those around me; our discourse was all upon religion: on
     the 23rd., we weighed anchor, and went down to the first
     buoy: on Sunday the 24th, owing to the confusion attending
     heaving the anchor, &c., we could not have worship. I
     employed myself most of the morning in reading Paley’s
     Sermons. Mr. B. was too ill to attend to any thing; about
     2 o’clock on that day, as Mr. B. and I were talking, we
     perceived the ship to touch ground; and, after two or three
     scrapings of that kind, fairly stick fast: all appeared
     alarmed on deck; the masts were ready to go over-board,
     and the decks began to heave: during this time the rudder
     broke off: in about half an hour we were carried into deep
     water, but obliged to anchor, the ship being unmanageable:
     she was found to leak, and all hands ordered to the pumps:
     on her first striking, Mr. B. quietly observed, “It is the
     Lord, let him do as seemeth him good;” then quietly putting
     on his clothes, we came up into the captain’s cabin, and
     remained there all the time: on Monday, we attempted to
     float up with the tide, but the wind failing, the ship went
     toward the sand, and the anchor was lost: in consequence of
     this all became dismayed, and it was recommended that the
     Colonel and Lady Elizabeth Murray, with Mr. B. and myself,
     should go on board the pilot schooner; we went accordingly,
     but here great troubles awaited us. Mr. B. fainted through
     fatigue; and as there was only one private cabin, he would
     not take it, but remained on deck the whole of that day
     and night, and till the evening of Tuesday, when we were
     taken on board the Baring: here we had a quiet night, and
     next day Mr. B. appeared quite revived; but the following
     night, having got chilled in his sleep, he arose very
     unwell, and from what I observed, I first began to think
     he would not recover: on Friday, we got up to Fulta, where
     Mr. B. again appeared better, but having been worse during
     Saturday night, he resolved to come to Calcutta on Sunday,
     where he now is, in a very weak state, at Mr. Harrington’s.
     During all these changes, I have felt little of either
     hope or fear, pleasure or pain; the plague of a hard heart
     has seized me. God grant me never to think well of myself,
     till I can feel more of his hand in my daily history! This
     insensibility began on going on board the yacht, where my
     retirements were interrupted, and my time broken up; being
     hourly with Mr. B., and constantly on the watch to wait
     upon him, destroyed my time on board; and now, O Lord,
     I would return to Thee, do thou quicken me, as thou art
     wont! I found the evening prayers in church very grateful
     on Sunday, and the sermon suitable. God! I thank thee for
     these visits: O enable me to remember them thankfully!
     The general temper of Mr. B. was deep humiliation; the
     penitential psalms he said were just suited to him, and
     often he praised God for his word, and for the record of
     his dealings with his saints: often he said, ‘the Lord’s
     will is best; His way is best, His time is best; He doeth
     all things well!’ He said, ‘a man does not know the
     wickedness of his heart till he grows old:’ he had been
     more sensible of Satan’s attacks during the last two years
     than at any period of his life: the Office for visiting
     the Sick he often read, and expressed his feeling of how
     suitable it was.”

Fatigue and exposure to the weather, added to the want of sustenance
proper for an invalid, so worked upon the exhausted frame of Mr.
Brown, that notwithstanding all that medical skill and the attention
of friends could do for him, he closed his mortal career within
about a fortnight of his return to Calcutta. As regarded Mr. Corrie,
his health still required that he should try the efficacy of a
sea-voyage, and therefore he made arrangements for embarking for the
Isle of France, at the beginning of July. In the meanwhile, however,
he was occupied in various clerical duties, and paid the last tribute
of affection to his deceased friend, Mr. Brown, by a funeral sermon
preached in the Presidency church. With reference to this and the
circumstances connected with his intended voyage, Mr. C. remarks:--

     “Diamond Harbour, ship Bengal, merchantman, July 5, 1812.
     Since my last memoranda, how many striking events have
     occurred, and how little, alas, improved!

     “On the fourteenth of June, Mr. B. departed this life.
     I have learned, from this event, the absolute necessity
     of keeping the mind in a humble, waiting posture. Lord,
     may I watch and pray, and have patience to endure, that
     I may inherit the promises. I have had frequent public
     ministrations; amongst others, preached on the twenty-fifth
     in the new church, a funeral sermon for Mr. B., it had the
     effect of removing prejudice from the minds of some; the
     enmity of ---- is too apparent, but he can go no further
     than permitted. O Lord, look in mercy on the congregation
     at the new church, and take not the light of thy truth
     from them! The frequent calls into the heat, with many
     interruptions, rendered it needful for me to seek change,
     and behold I am here, I think by the will of God. I hope
     to get rid of the disease of the liver, but the failure of
     my lungs, I am conscious of, will not be so easily repaired.

     “I am in the Lord’s hands. Agra seems on all accounts best
     fitted for me, presenting less labour among Europeans, and
     more opportunities of schools, &c. among the natives. Lord,
     bring me thither, if it be thy will!

     “July 12th. I have been detained here beyond my
     expectations; my mind generally at peace through Jesus
     Christ. I have humbled myself, and renewed my repentance,
     and trust I am at peace through the blood of sprinkling.
     During the week have had many conversations with P.; and, I
     hope, with good effect; he has been extracting the passages
     that refer to Justification, and said last night, he is
     determined to give the subject thorough consideration. In
     prayer I have had more freedom than on shore, and have been
     led, from reflecting on God’s care of his church, to pray
     for the enlargement of it in India.”

Whilst detained on the shores of India, Mr. Corrie received a letter
from Mr. Buckworth, which called forth the following reply:--

                                                  “July 20, 1812.

     “A letter of your’s without date, reached me yesterday, and
     delighted me much. I have had many apprehensions respecting
     your continuance in this ‘vale of tears:‘--fears for myself
     and for your flock and family, not for yourself. I trust
     that as it is better for us that you should remain; you
     will be given to us for a season longer.

     “You and I have both erred in excess of labour; we know
     who hath said, “I will have mercy and not sacrifice.” I do
     not, however, regret having done what I could. It is here,
     I trust, we do not presume in expecting pardon for our
     iniquities; and though we might have served our generation
     more effectually by simple dependence on the promised
     blessing, on quiet unconsuming labour, we may hope when
     our head is laid low, others shall enter into our labours.
     The prospect in this land is indeed very discouraging on
     this head. Government continues its determined opposition
     to every thing tending to bring the light of the Gospel
     before the heathen. It is now, also, a melancholy
     consideration that so many of their native subjects,
     bearing the Christian name, are left to ‘perish for lack of
     knowledge.’ Would to God something might be done on this
     subject in the new settlement of the Charter! Surely the
     religious public at home, will make an effort to bring the
     circumstances of the Indian Church before Parliament.

     “I am highly gratified by the account of your young
     friends who have devoted themselves to missionary labour.
     ‘Say unto them, be strong, fear not.’ How earnestly do I
     wish a way were opened for them to this land; how gladly
     would I hail them as brethren; but, unless they could
     come in some way accredited from home, such is the state
     of things here, I could not serve them much. There is
     no hindrance cast in my own way, but such as the Gospel
     meets with every where; but what I mean is, that very
     little could be done to procure the consent of Government
     to their stay, unless they had leave from home. By the
     Charter, the Company ought to have schoolmasters as well
     as Chaplains for their European regiments; could none of
     the London friends procure schoolmasters to be sent here?
     Mr. Thomason is greatly in want of an assistant in the old
     church, Calcutta; could not one of your young friends get
     ordained, and come over to us? Whilst Mr. Brown was alive,
     Mr. Thomason had help; now he stands alone in Calcutta.
     Besides, the ‘Society for Missions to Africa and the East,’
     want to send a missionary to Ceylon, a most important field
     of labour. I would urge their coming to this land, if a
     way were opened, in preference to Africa, because here the
     natives are not sanguinary, and the land is under European
     government; and also, because though I have lost my health,
     and others also, yet I think another who should follow my
     advice might here live to the age of man, notwithstanding
     the difference of climate. Mr. Desgranges destroyed
     himself; ‘the zeal of God’s house ate him up,’ I think may
     be said of this member of Christ, in his measure; and the
     same of beloved and honoured Martyn. Notwithstanding the
     opposition of Government, a work is working in this land,
     which the despisers wonder at, and know not how to resist.
     The public sentiment appeared gloriously on the foundation
     of the Calcutta Auxiliary Bible Society; even those who
     oppose officially, saying they obey orders from home,
     cannot resist the Christian argument in behalf of the many
     already baptized. Missions have uniformly been discouraged
     by the British government here, yet we find ten or twelve
     thousand converts among their subjects; and now many, very
     many of our British fellow-subjects here are awakened
     seriously to their own state, and to a sense of the duty
     we owe them. Some young officers, I know, have schools in
     their own house, where they educate the native christian
     children they find about them. At every European station,
     there are some of these children. One married officer and
     his lady have collected about twenty, and pray with them in
     Hindoostanee every morning. Let these considerations, my
     brother, excite a spirit of prayer for us here; among your
     young brethren, at your quarterly meetings, make mention
     of our affairs, that we may have a place in your joint
     supplications; and God grant that some of them may be led
     to offer themselves to the help of the Lord!”

Then, after mentioning some particulars respecting the state in which
he left his flocks at Cawnpore, Chunar and Benares, and which have
already been related, Mr. Corrie proceeds:

     “What a dreary waste from Benares to Calcutta! There are
     indeed, several worthy individuals in that place; but

           “The sound of the church-going bell
            These beautiful plains never heard;
            Never sighed at the sound of the knell,
            Nor smiled when a sabbath appeared.”

     “Mr. Martyn is in Persia; I heard from him, dated March
     20th from Shiraz; he had finished a copy of the New
     Testament, and of the Psalms, in Persian, and was employed
     on the book of Daniel: he purposes going into Arabia, to
     prove specimens of Arabic translation, before his return.
     I baptized four converts a few days ago, the fruits of a
     Native brother’s labours, who possesses good ministerial
     abilities, and promises great usefulness. Of the Baptists,
     I may speak in a body. Their chief success is in Calcutta,
     where some, in most months, are added to them. They have
     some brethren at Agra; some at Dinapore, or Patna (which
     are close together,) but I hear of none persuaded by
     them except a young officer, who was awakened by some
     means at a distance from Christian society, and having
     none that he could advise with, wrote to them; and from
     one step to another seems now disposed to join them. He
     has been persuaded to pause. Their labours in Chinese
     and Sanscrit are valuable, because they have proper helps;
     but their other productions are inferior. Of those who
     have joined them in Calcutta, it is no disparaging of
     their individual worth to say that they are mostly of
     inferior rank. I hesitate not to say, they prevail by legal
     considerations for the most part; and I lament that their
     prejudices against the Church of England will not suffer
     them to take one step beyond their own narrow enclosure.
     But may the work of the Lord, as far as it is His work,
     prosper in their hands, no less than in ours: and may we
     all be found one in Christ Jesus! For myself, I write this
     on board of ship in Saugur roads, at the entrance of the
     river leading to Calcutta. I am going to sea on account of
     a liver-complaint, which has afflicted me now upwards of
     three years, and does not give way to medicine. I am told,
     it has not yet injured my constitution, but ministerial
     labours completely counteract the effects of medicine, so
     that I can only hope for a cure from rest and change of
     air. I feel it a duty to try these; and for this purpose
     came down from Cawnpore.”

Scarcely had Mr. Corrie put to sea, when he again had to encounter
the perils of the deep. Writing on the 31st July, he remarks:--

     “On the 27th it began to blow a gale, which continued the
     whole day with great violence: and though its violence
     abated in the evening, it has been blowing weather ever
     since. Yesterday, we were obliged to heave overboard
     370 bags of rice, it having got damaged from the water
     we shipped continually, and gave the ship so great a
     lurch that we were afraid she would sink, the pumps not
     being able to keep her clear. On Monday especially, our
     danger was apparent, and my mind was at first a good deal
     discomposed. I retired to my cabin, and on a review could
     say that I have not wasted my health in self-pleasing, that
     however mixed my services have been with sinful motives,
     yet the furtherance of the gospel has been my chief aim,
     and now I am here seeking renewal of strength, much against
     my own inclination; but at the urgent importunities of
     friends: and if it please God to restore me, I intend no
     other work or way but to serve Him in the gospel of his
     Son. Such reflections encouraged me to draw near with
     faith to God in Christ. I was favoured with freedom of
     access, and by prayer and thanksgiving, was enabled to
     ‘cast my burden on the Lord,’ and to hope for and expect
     the preservation afforded. I, at the same time, devoted
     my body, soul, and spirit anew to the service of God my
     Saviour; and I do now renew that dedication, and purpose
     through thy strength, O blessed Saviour, to know nothing,
     and follow after nothing, but the knowledge of my Lord
     Jesus Christ, and the diffusion of his blessed truth.

     “August 3rd. The wind still boisterous, and often stormy;
     this destroys our comfort with the poor attendance we have
     on board. I endeavour to improve my mind by reading and
     conversation with ----, who seems to come more and more
     into true notions on religion; may grace be vouchsafed him,
     that he may feel their importance, and rest upon them!
     During yesterday and to-day we have been returning to
     nearly our former way; the wish of putting into some port
     has been much present with me, and the hope of being able
     to return, without going to the Isle of France, has made
     me too anxious. O Lord, give me grace to be submissive to
     thine appointments! I know not what is best: thou, Lord
     well knowest: O direct, controul, and support my soul!
     The sight of the raging sea, which at times made me feel
     powerfully the presence and majesty of God, ceases to have
     that effect: because others apprehend no danger, I am ready
     to conclude there is none, and so live without that looking
     unto Jesus which is my duty and my privilege. O Lord,
     though to human apprehension danger is not nigh; yet my
     life is in thy hands, and thine are all my ways; and in the
     practice of these words I desire to live and die. Amen!”

Owing to this stormy weather, contrary winds, and a strong current,
the ship made but little way, for after a fortnight’s sailing,
Mr. Corrie found himself no further on his voyage than the Cacoas
islands. The captain then decided to retrace their course somewhat,
with a view to getting to the westward, and that object was
accomplished so far that toward the end of August, the ship was
slowly working her way down the coast, and on the 6th of September
entered the Vizagapatam roads. It appears however, from Mr. Corrie’s
Journal, that the prospect of a long and tedious voyage, and the
consequent uncertainty as to the time when he might get back again
to India, often ‘filled his mind with painful anxiety.’ The return,
too, of former pains in his side, he regarded as being chiefly
occasioned by ‘the want of regular food and exercise.’ These and
other considerations weighed so powerfully on his mind that for
some time previously to coming within sight of the coast of India,
he had decided to abandon the voyage to the Isle of France, and to
‘disembark at whatever port the ship might put in.’ On reaching
Vizagapatam he carried that purpose into effect. This place had
then been occupied for about eight years as a central station by
the London Missionary Society; and was, moreover, a place of much
interest to Mr. Corrie, as being the scene of the labours and death
of Mr. Desgranges, who is so feelingly mentioned in the foregoing
letter to Mr. Buckworth. Here, therefore, Mr. Corrie remained for
more than a fortnight in the house of Mr. Pritchett, the London
Society’s missionary. During his stay at Vizagapatam, Mr. C. notes on

     “September 20th. This day six years I arrived in Calcutta:
     I scarcely know what to say or think of the time gone by. I
     feel myself an unprofitable servant. My coldness in prayer;
     my want of love to the Bible; my generally reading other
     books in its stead, oppress me with a sense of guilt. The
     favour shown me here is very humiliating, being so much
     more than I deserve. O God, give me grace to know and do
     thy will, and to delight in thy law!”

Mr. Corrie’s departure from Vizagapatam is noticed as follows:--

     “September 23rd. On board the ship Union, leaving
     Vizagapatam. Arrived here on the 6th, wrote to Mr.
     Pritchett, and went on shore by invitation, in the evening,
     to their family worship. I have been hospitably entertained
     ever since, at the mission-house, though owing to the
     lowness of the place, and consequent heat, I should have
     preferred a higher situation. I have observed in general
     that the missionaries are men of true piety, and of more
     candour than I expected: they receive ten pagodas per month
     from Government (a pitiful sum,) for which they officiate
     as Chaplain to the station; but do not baptize or marry.
     They have public worship in the court-house on Sunday,
     and at the house on top of the hill; the attendance is
     generally good.[83] I officiated at the latter place the
     two Sundays I was there. On Sunday last I administered the
     Lord’s Supper to twelve; and last night married a couple;
     baptized eight children, and preached in the court-house in
     the evening, and afterwards administered the Lord’s Supper
     to six....

     “Though the missionaries are doubtless good men, yet I
     see decidedly the advantage men who have been brought up
     from youth with attention to learning, have over them. I
     suggested a native Christian school, and it will, I expect,
     be adopted; and according to my views of the subject, will
     supply a door of entrance among the heathen. May I remember
     their Christian love, and be excited to imitate it! May the
     remembrance of the attention shown me operate to render me
     more anxious to deserve it!

     “September 24th. Last night we were obliged to come to
     anchor off Vizagapatam. This morning a slight breeze
     sprung up; and we are now, 4 a. m. losing sight of
     hospitable Waltere. My heart, ever cleaving to creatures,
     viewed Mr. P’s house several times during the day, with
     regret at leaving it.... I know, O Lord, that thy salvation
     is life eternal, and that in thy light alone does light and
     joy appear to the soul. O Lord my God, lift upon me the
     light of thy countenance for the sake of thine Anointed!”

The following are also extracts from Mr. C’s Journal:--

     “Sunday, 27th Sept.--This has been a most unprofitable day;
     the temper of those on board seems more removed from the
     christian temper than any thing I have seen. A contemptuous
     disregard of every thing sacred reminds me continually of
     the caution not to cast pearls before swine; yet let me not
     suffer sin upon my neighbour unreproved. I have attempted
     to pray, and have gone over the usual subjects; but, alas,
     with little heart: it occurred to me the increased number
     of names I have to mention ought to make me mark more
     decidedly the power of God towards me.

     “October 6th,--Below Kedgeree. During the last week, I was
     occupied a good deal with some writings of Madame de Stael;
     and could not but be thankful for more comfortable views of
     religious truth than she can afford: I felt how absolutely
     absurd all her theories of happiness are, and how insane
     her most exemplary characters. At the same time, I felt a
     fear lest any foolish pride of sentiment, or fine feeling,
     should tempt me to forsake the fountain of living waters,
     and was led to pray with some fervency for a more simple
     regard to the word of God, and more attention to it. On
     Sunday, the 4th, we fell in with a pilot, and yesterday
     evening anchored in Saugur roads. To-day, we are at anchor
     below Kedgeree light-house. I have felt much thankfulness
     for a safe return to this land. I know not whether or not
     my side is well, but feel that I am weaker than formerly;
     easily affected by the heat, and do not soon recover from
     the use of medicine. I have, however much reason to adore
     the love and kindness of God my Saviour, that this land,
     once the land of banishment to me, is become a land of
     promise. I return to it not by constraint, but as a home:
     there are sisters, brothers, and dear friends in the Lord,
     to whom my soul cleaves, and to whom I am welcome. O my
     God, surely I owe thee myself, my soul and body!--I have
     owed to thee my days; thou hast delivered me from the
     great deep, and my soul shall praise thee! My work among
     the British, my native schools and teaching, to these
     employments I consecrate my days.”

On the evening of Thursday the 8th October 1812, Mr. Corrie reached
Calcutta, and on finding that Mr. Thomason was laid aside from duty,
by an attack of illness, Mr. C. undertook the services at the Old
Church for a few weeks, until his friend should be convalescent.
It was not his desire, however, to remain long absent from his own
station, now that his health had been in a great measure restored
to him, and he, therefore, made preparations for proceeding to
Agra. But before leaving Calcutta, Mr. C. was united in marriage to
Elizabeth, the only child of Mr. W. Myers, a gentleman whose name
has already occurred in these memoirs as among the friends of the
Rev. D. Brown. Respecting Miss Myers, the observation of Mr. Thomason
was, in reference to her marriage with Mr. Corrie, that she was
‘one who entered into all his missionary views, and was indeed a
help-meet for him.’ It was now, also, that the Christian friendship
which subsisted throughout after-life between Mr. Corrie and Abdool
Messeeh, may be said to have commenced; for the sincerity of Abdool’s
profession of the gospel having by this time been well proved, it was
decided that he should accompany Mr. Corrie to Agra, as a Scripture
Reader and Catechist. An outline of the history of this remarkable
convert to the Christian faith, was drawn up at the time by Mr.
Corrie,[84] and has been frequently reprinted; so that it would be
superfluous, in this place, to do more than to supply such a brief
sketch of Abdool’s earlier life, as may serve for the elucidation
of some particulars respecting him, which are given below. It will
be remembered, then, that Abdool was a native of Delhi; but that
when arrived at man’s estate he accompanied his family to Lucknow;
being all the while a zealous Mahomedan. From thence he removed
to Cawnpore, where he was so impressed by the preaching of Mr.
Martyn, that he became a candidate for baptism, accompanied Mr. M.
to Calcutta, and was, after due probation, admitted into the church
of Christ, by Mr. Brown, on Whit-Sunday, 1811. From that time until
he joined Mr. Corrie’s family, Abdool lived in Calcutta or the
neighbourhood, suffering much opposition from the Mahomedans, but
being the instrument of much good to many of his countrymen.

At the latter end of November 1812, Mr. and Mrs. Corrie took leave
of Calcutta for Agra, Abdool with several Christian native children
occupying a boat by themselves. Abdool employed himself during the
journey in teaching the children to read, &c., and in composing hymns
to native measures. These he was in the habit of singing with the
children and servants when the party came to anchor for the night. As
also, the journey from Calcutta occupied many weeks, it was customary
to remain at anchor throughout every Sunday that occurred on the way;
and on those occasions Abdool used to collect together the boatmen
and others on the banks of the river, and explain the scriptures
to them. On many occasions, too, he maintained arguments with
Brahmins and Romanists on subjects connected with their respective
superstitions; but, as copious accounts of those disputes are given
in the printed journal of Abdool’s proceedings, it is not considered
necessary to repeat them. The result usually was to call forth much
hostility to Abdool, and to expose him to personal danger. Thus, from
Cawnpore, 17th Feb. 1813, Mr. Corrie writes to his brother-in-law:--


                        TO J. W. SHERER, ESQ.

     ‘We expect to leave this about the 25th; we should have
     gone before now, but that Abdool Messeeh is gone to
     Lucknow to visit his family, and will not return until
     the 24th. I was not for his going, nor did he intend to
     go, but on his writing from Allahabad, a brother and
     nephew of his came over here, and received him with
     much affection, and told him, that his father, mother,
     another brother and three sisters, with their children,
     had determined on coming over, if he would not go to see
     them; professing also, that all his family wish to become
     Christians together with him. There has been a great stir
     at Lucknow about his conversion. A crowd assembled one
     night about his father’s house and demanded that he should
     openly renounce Abdool, or they should suspect him also of
     becoming a Christian. He and the brothers said, they would
     not renounce Abdool, who had always behaved kindly, and now
     wrote to them with great affection. A tumult ensued, which
     required the interference of the Cutwal; and the report
     was carried to the Nabob’s son, if not to the Nabob. The
     great men took the part of Abdool’s family, and reproved
     the others; but under these circumstances, I did not think
     it advisable for Abdool to go over, nor would he but for
     the desire manifested by his family to cleave to him. This
     made him determined to run all risks, and also because his
     sisters’ husbands threatened to forsake them, if they came
     over here; and Abdool argued it was not right for him to be
     the cause of their disobeying their husbands, so he would
     go to them. Indeed his whole conduct manifests a great deal
     of discretion and good sense, though no superiority in
     understanding; so that I fear nothing from indiscretion,
     and have sent a servant of my own with him, and hope the
     Lord will be his defence.

In a letter, however, which Mr. Corrie addressed soon after this to
Lieutenant (now Captain) Peevor of H. M. 17th foot, he states that
Abdool “was obliged to retreat privately,” from Lucknow, the rage of
the Mahomedans was so great against him. Yet it appears that “his
father, mother, two brothers and two nephews, had all professed their
readiness to embrace the gospel,” and that the nephews returned with
Abdool to Cawnpore.


       [83] From the period of their first arrival at
            Vizagapatam, the Missionaries seem to have been in
            the habit of conducting public worship according to
            the ritual of the church of England; and proceeded
            to translate the English liturgy into the Teloogoo
            language.

       [84] Missionary Register, vol. i. p. 261-266.




                             CHAPTER XI.

                                AGRA.


Mr. Corrie and his party reached Agra on the 18th of April 1813.
There he was made acquainted with the death of Mr. Martyn. In a
letter to Mr. Sherer, and with reference to that event, Mr. C.
writes:--

     “We arrived here in good health, and found your letter
     containing the affecting intelligence of Martyn’s
     death:--to us afflictive, to him happy beyond expression.
     I thought of writing immediately, but could find nothing
     beyond lamentations to express; lamentations for us, not
     for him. He was meet for the “inheritance of the saints
     in light,”--my master is taken away from me, O for a
     double portion of his spirit! The work of printing and
     distributing the scriptures, will henceforth go on more
     slowly. It is impossible to have so lively an impression of
     the importance of supplying the written word, where people
     have not intercourse with the spiritually needy. You all
     feel for the poor English, because you now and then talk
     with them, and have demonstration of their ignorance on
     eternal things. Thus those who enter among the heathen have
     a demonstration on the subject, which constrains them to
     pity them, and to exclaim, ‘O that they had but a Bible!’”

Shortly after his arrival at Agra, Mr. Corrie enquired for, and
obtained a house, every way suitable for the residence of Abdool
Messeeh. The rent was agreed upon, and possession in part given, but
in the meantime Abdool’s circumstances becoming known, the owner of
the house, a Mahomedan, departed from his agreement, and would not
accept Abdool for a tenant. But shortly afterwards a property called
Boottats Kuttra, a court in the middle of the principal street in
Agra, being put up for sale, it was bought by an English gentleman,
who generously gave it for the purposes of the mission. In this place
Abdool Messeeh regularly conducted Divine Service twice on Sundays,
and once, sometimes twice, during the week. He had family worship
also, daily with the Native Christians, who resided in or near the
Kuttra. Some account of these missionary proceedings is given by Mr.
C. in answer to a letter from Mr. Sherer. He writes, on the 8th June
1813:--

     “The plan of a Native Free-School I admire greatly; and
     have no doubt of its utility and success. I have been
     proceeding on that plan ever since I came to the country.
     James[85] failed me, and one of the boys, (Simon) through
     the wickedness of his parents, is likely to fail me also;
     yet I do not despair. Osman is one of the cleverest of any,
     in English; Nicholas, most solid; Abdool’s two nephews are
     promising, especially the younger, Shumsher Rham. We have
     a tribe of younger ones, and a whole host of little sons
     of drummers. J. A. is coming, on the first opportunity, to
     be my English master for them; which will relieve me much,
     both as to time and labour; after two disappointments,
     and many attempts, we have at length obtained an old
     premise in the city. This is the fourth day we have been
     in possession; and a school is already collected there.
     The whole city rings with this, to them new doctrine; and
     copies of the New Testament are eagerly sought for: not
     a tongue moves in opposition; which is a matter both of
     surprise, and congratulation. Abdool Messeeh is greatly
     called forth; and his heart becomes more and more in the
     work, as people come forward. Two or three, indeed many,
     have professed their wish to be baptized; but perhaps these
     are not the most hopeful, for being most forward. The
     subject has now got amongst the English; and they evidently
     don’t know what to make of it.... The people in the city
     generally speak of the school with great approbation, and
     hope it will be made a college. The establishment for the
     whole is now, a Molwee 20 Rs.; an Ostad 10 Rs.; a writer 7
     Rs.; and a schoolmaster for the little boys 8 Rs.; besides
     Durwan 3 Rs.; and about 25 Rs. for the maintenance of
     children, &c. &c. So that, I fear, I cannot enlarge much
     our present establishment.”

Although it had hitherto been the unchristian policy of the Indian
government either to discountenance all efforts to raise the moral
and religious condition of their subjects, or to leave them to be
altogether dependent for instruction in the great truths of revealed
religion, on the personal zeal and narrow resources of a few private
individuals, yet a better state of things appeared now to be at
hand. The various missionary societies, and the religious portion of
Britain at large, regarded the renewal of the company’s charter to
be a favourable opportunity for pressing upon the attention of the
legislature, the destitute condition of India with respect to the
gospel. This was accordingly done, and the result was, that during
the month of June 1813, the parliament affirmed the necessity for a
Church establishment in India; voted that it was the duty of England
to promote the moral and religious improvement of her subjects
in India; and that facilities ought likewise to be afforded to
persons desirous of going to India for the purpose of accomplishing
those benevolent designs. This favourable change in the policy of
government was of course unknown to Mr. Corrie, when he addressed the
following letter:


                       TO THE REV. MR. SIMEON.

                                            “Agra, June 23, 1813.

     “What will the new charter bring to light in respect
     of our ‘project,’ as Mr. Cecil used to speak? The
     desirableness of some extension of our present
     establishment, is beyond all dispute: the most careless
     among us cry shame on the want of attention of our
     governors to this point. If we had a sufficient
     establishment of proper chaplains, there need be little
     further anxiety about evangelizing India: but who are
     to supply the places of Brown, Buchanan, Jeffreys, and
     Martyn? It seems almost as if Mr. Carey’s prophecy were
     coming true, that God would not employ _us_ in the work
     of evangelization. Amidst the great attention we hear of,
     excited to the distribution of the scriptures, how comes
     it, none of our Brethren offer _themselves_ to come and
     _distribute_ the word of life? And what are we, who believe
     Episcopacy to be the Order of the primitive church, to do
     for duly ordained pastors, from among the native converts?
     I write thus freely, my honoured father in the gospel, for
     now Mr. Brown and Mr. Martyn no longer bring these subjects
     before you, and Mr. Thomason, though he is nearer the scene
     of action, has really no more to do with the _natives_ than
     you have, nor does Mr. Parson give himself to this work.
     Mr. Thomason has more to do as Minister of the Old Church,
     Secretary, etc. etc. than one man ought to have, and this
     situation must always occupy one: and Mr. Parson gives
     himself wholly to the British soldiers, among whom he is
     eminently useful.

     “I am now next on the list of Chaplains to be appointed
     to Calcutta, and if I must go, there will then be no
     chaplain out of Calcutta, to enter into the affairs of
     the Natives. There is no town in India, where a person
     may not be usefully employed in missionary work, and for
     superintendance, Calcutta is a preferable situation, but
     then there must be something to superintend. At present, I
     am in some perplexity on this subject. God has been pleased
     to make the labours of Abdool-Messeeh very acceptable in
     this place in general. I yesterday sent off to Mr. Bates
     a copy of his journal from March to this time; there are
     eighteen children at his school in the city, and six
     candidates for baptism: the whole city, containing a
     population of upwards of fifty thousand, is moved, and very
     little opposition has appeared; _none_ that deserves to be
     called opposition: the Kazee[86] has begun to move against
     us. I trust we shall give no occasion for tumult, nor have
     I the smallest fear on that head. Martyn’s translation
     is admired as a composition, no less than as containing
     important truth; could he look from Heaven and see Abdool
     Messeeh, with the translated New Testament in his hand,
     preaching to the listening throng, and could he know of
     Mr. M.’s wish to follow his steps in this work, it would
     add fresh delight to his holy soul! Now this prospect of a
     rising native church makes one reflect, what is to be done
     for them. Could Abdool Messeeh be properly ordained, he
     is, in my opinion, for humility, zeal and discretion, most
     eminently worthy of the ministry. Fervent and experimental
     piety with such matured judgment, I never expected to
     meet with in a native of Hindoostan, and such are the
     sentiments of Mr. M. and another Christian friend, now
     with us, respecting him. But according to my views on the
     subject, he cannot with propriety administer the Christian
     Sacraments; and my successors would not, perhaps, admit
     him to their presence. It seems my duty, to decline all
     removal, as far as I may be permitted, and, I trust, I
     shall be able to do so, though it would, in many respects,
     prove a trial both personal and otherwise. The Armenian
     bishops, and the bishops of the Syrians, have occurred to
     me, if their ordinations be considered valid.[87] If I had
     any suitable helper to whom the work might be committed,
     I should perhaps, think it advisable to take the privilege
     of furlough, for the recovery of my strength, if it please
     God. The great quantity of medicine, I was obliged to take,
     reduced me much, and the right side is still very tender.
     I trust in this, and all my ways, to acknowledge the Lord,
     and doubt not, he will guide me aright. May his kingdom
     come more fully in my own heart, that I may do his will in
     all things!”

The success which, under the divine blessing, had so signally
marked the labours of Abdool Messeeh at Agra, was not unattended by
correspondent difficulties. The loss of caste and the consequent
destitution which followed the native converts, required to be
alleviated by supplying them with sustenance, until some employment
could be found for them. The schools also, which had been established
under the favourable circumstances, mentioned in the foregoing
letters, were necessarily attended with a certain regular expense.
As, therefore, Mr. Corrie’s resources were altogether inadequate
to meet the stated and increasing demands upon them, he applied to
the Calcutta agents of the Society for Missions to Africa and the
East, to ascertain how far assistance might be looked for from that
Society. He suggested to them, at the same time, that an auxiliary
missionary society might be formed in Calcutta, which might aid
the work he had in hand, by monthly subscriptions. He advised,
moreover, that a few friends of missions should form themselves into
a committee, for the purpose of considering how native converts
could be best employed, and their children be brought up to trades.
The result of this application to Calcutta, was the formation of an
association, and the collecting of subscriptions to the amount of
four hundred pounds, the express objects of which were to enable
Mr. Corrie to “establish and support native schools at Agra and
elsewhere.” Subscriptions from private sources also, were not
wanting. To a friend who took an interest in the Agra mission, Mr.
Corrie writes on the 2nd of Aug. 1813.

     “I was far from expecting any separate contribution to the
     work here, but do not even wish to refuse it; for sure I am
     that of money thus spent, we shall be able to say at last,
     ‘what I have given away, remains.’”

He then goes on to inform his correspondent, that

     “The Sunday (July 25.) before yesterday was the beginning
     of our visible edifice. The foundation is, I am persuaded,
     laid in Christ. The Hukeem[88] and Abdool’s nephew, are
     both not only enlightened in mind, but informed also in
     judgment. The former once led a party to fight for Islam,
     consequently his conversion has called forth more of the
     spite of the enemy than we before have seen. Several have
     told Abdool plainly, that under any other government
     they would have risen upon him. I observe without saying
     anything to any around. Mr. H. talks to every body in the
     same strain, and then tells E. the remarks people make.
     Why! I know before hand what such people will say.”

The Hukeem mentioned in the preceding extract, was a Mahomedan
from Bhurtpore, and physician to the Rajah’s family. His first
acquaintance with divine truth was through the medium of the
Pentateuch in Arabic, which a Romish priest had lent him some years
before the date of the letter just quoted. Afterwards, meeting with
a copy of the gospels translated into Persian, by Sabat, the Hukeem
became convinced of the truth of Christianity, but made no open
profession of the gospel; until under the instruction of Abdool, he
learned “the way of God more perfectly,” and was baptised by the name
of Talib Messeeh Khan, on the Sunday above-mentioned. His baptism
occasioned so great a sensation among the Mahomedans, that Abdool’s
house in the city was for some days a constant scene of comers
and goers. The disciples of the various Musselman saints came in
bodies (sometimes of upwards of forty) to enquire about the mode of
initiation into the Christian Religion. The eldest nephew of Abdool
was baptised at the same time with the Hukeem.

These promising appearances, however, brought with them correspondent
anxieties, so far as respected Mr. Corrie; for in writing to Mr.
Sherer (Aug. 18, 1813,) he remarks:--

     “I never before felt the care attending the winning of
     souls as now; and never before so entirely felt my own
     perfect insignificance and folly. While all was only
     beginning, there was food for vain glory, and no occasion
     for suspicion or watchfulness. Now time has been given for
     probation, my rest sometimes departs from me lest Satan
     should gain an advantage over us.”

Mr. Corrie then goes on to inform Mr. S.:

     “The Hukeem I baptized proves a man of superior
     understanding. He has begun Hebrew, and if he proceeds
     as he has begun, will prove a most valuable corrector
     of the Hindoostanee Old Testament, which Mirza Fitrut
     has translated from the English. He is not, however, so
     obliging in his disposition as Abdool Messeeh. The eldest
     nephew of Abdool has been, ever since his baptism, quite
     another creature,--lively, devoted, and the servant of all.
     He is on your fund, as a Reader; and the Hukeem receives
     for himself and family 20 R. till he becomes qualified
     for some office in the church. To prove the sincerity of
     the Fakeers, I hired forty Bigohs[89] of land, and they
     have laboured with readiness for their bread, in clearing,
     weeding, watching, &c. This has been a present extra
     expense, but I am told the grain will produce a return.
     In consequence of the scarcity, multitudes of poor are
     very ill off, and a subscription, at the suggestion of Mr.
     F. was entered into for their relief. The sum amounts to
     15 Rs. a day, and Abdool and I are the Almoners: a more
     troublesome and unthankful office I was never engaged
     in. Two months, it is thought, will put an end to the
     present distress. Three Schools, beside the one at home,
     are gaining ground. The supply you mentioned could easily
     be appropriated, and when something is determined, I will
     send down a statement of items. I refrain at present, lest
     I should seem to claim what will come as an offering to
     the Lord. I feel it would be an honour to live on bread
     and water that all might go in this work and way; but the
     claims of justice and family demand attention also.”

Occupations of various kinds now so multiplied upon Mr. Corrie, that
his private Journal was but irregularly kept. The completion of seven
years’ residence in India was, however, too marked an event to pass
unnoticed by him, and he therefore writes:--

     “Agra, Sep. 19, 1813. To-morrow will complete to me seven
     years in India. Many mercies have attended me, and many
     instances of God’s gracious dealings, which ought to be
     had in remembrance, to His praise, and my own comfort and
     encouragement. The death of Mr. Brown, and afterwards of
     Mr. Martyn, deprived me of two pillars on whom I leaned
     partly for so long a time: and to this hour I feel my
     earthly masters to be taken away from me. There is now
     none on earth, to whom I look for guidance as to what I
     should do in my ministry. For a time this discouraged
     me; but the Lord mercifully made my way plain, and his
     work here is going on with seeming success. For this work
     Abdool Messeeh was raised up, and qualified, and sent of
     God. He is eminently humble, teachable, persevering, and
     zealous. Two were baptized from the heathen on July 25:
     and eight more, with three of their children, on August
     25. There are now many catechumens, and upwards of ninety
     children in school, at three places. Keeping the journal
     of Abdool’s labours, has interrupted my private journal;
     though, after all, they are quite distinct. In general,
     my mind has been too much occupied in the outward work. I
     have lived too little in the habit of ejaculatory prayer;
     and contented myself with very little of spirituality
     of mind; so that if success had depended on me, it must
     utterly have failed. But the spiritual temple grows up ‘not
     by might, or by power,’ but by the Spirit of the Lord. Oh
     may he carry on his work within, and enable me to grow up
     into Christ in all things. I have engaged too largely
     in expences, considering the natural claims upon me. The
     schools and native christians stand me in not less than
     300 Rs. monthly; while building &c. is likely to involve
     me in debt. The heart of Mr. B. was, indeed, mercifully
     disposed to give _Kuttra_; and help is promised from other
     quarters, and I doubt not but the Lord will provide, since,
     I think, I seek not my own vain glory, but His worthy
     praise and honour. For some days past, I have experienced
     a sensible return of the liver complaint. What this may
     be the forerunner of, I know not. It would be a painful
     trial to cease from labour now, though that may be needful
     to try my humility, whilst, Oh what may it prove to my
     European flock! Who shall speak to them, or make known the
     way of salvation? Lord! direct me in this matter. Enable
     me to give myself to meditation and prayer: and grant me
     to know and do thy will.... Praised be thy name, who hast
     kept me in my purpose respecting coming to India. The love
     of souls, more than of wealth, or earthly honour, I trust,
     still, through grace, predominates; and may grace reign in
     my soul, through righteousness, unto eternal life, through
     Jesus Christ.”

It was soon after the date of the preceding extract, that
intelligence reached Agra from England, that it was intended to
publish a memoir of Mr. Martyn; and Mr. Corrie in consequence,
addressed the following letter


                       TO THE REV. J. SARGENT.

                                             “Agra, Nov. 1. 1813.

     “I have very lately learned through Mr. Thomason that
     you have undertaken to draw up a life of the Rev. H.
     Martyn. It will be of use for you to know that when he
     left Cawnpore in 1810 to seek change of air, I was with
     him, and persuaded him to leave in my hands a number of
     memorandums he was about to destroy. They were sealed
     up, but on his death, being opened, they prove to be
     Journals of the exercises of his mind from January 1803,
     to 1807, inclusive. They seem to me no less worthy of
     publication than the Journal of Mr. Brainerd, if more
     books of that kind should be judged necessary. Since the
     beginning of 1807, Mr. M. favoured me with almost a weekly
     letter, in which his various employments and engagements
     for the furtherance of the gospel in this country, are
     detailed with occasional very interesting remarks.
     This correspondence ceased on my being ordered by our
     commander-in-chief to assist Mr. M. in the duties of the
     station of Cawnpore, when I took up my abode with him from
     June till his departure, October 1st. Other letters passed
     between us after that time, and it is my intention to
     send you copies of all the above correspondence, together
     with his private Memorandums. The latter, with copies of
     Martyn’s letters from Feb. to July 1807, were sent off
     this day to Mr. Thomason in Calcutta, to be forwarded to
     England by the first opportunity, and the copies of the
     remaining letters shall follow as soon as may be. Of course
     I have omitted to copy what seems purely personal: yet
     much remains which you will perhaps judge unnecessary for
     publication, and will exercise your own judgment on that
     head. All the extracts seem to me, however, to cast light
     on the progress of missionary work in this land, and may
     perhaps be thought interesting to those who take a concern
     in Indian affairs. These extracts give so full a view of
     Mr. M’s character that nothing remains for me to add. Only
     I may say, a more perfect character I never met with, nor
     expect to see again on earth. During the four years we
     were fellow-labourers in this country, I had no less than
     six opportunities of enjoying his company; the last time
     for four months together, and under the same roof all
     the time; and each opportunity only increased my love and
     veneration for him.

     “I conclude the above intelligence will plead my excuse for
     writing to you without previous introduction, and I was
     anxious it should reach you through the nearest channel.
     Your brother in Calcutta has told me several times of your
     welfare; and during beloved Martyn’s life I used to hear
     of you sometimes. Your person, whilst a student at King’s
     College, was well known to me, and your character admired,
     though I had not steadiness of principle sufficient at that
     time to imitate you; and consequently had no pretensions to
     an acquaintance with you, though I often greatly desired
     it. To that ‘Father in Israel,’ Mr. Simeon, I owe all my
     comfort on earth and all my hopes respecting eternity: for
     through his instrumentality the seeds of grace, I trust,
     were, during my residence at Cambridge, especially during
     the latter part of my stay, implanted in my heart, and have
     influenced, though alas! unsteadily, my after days.

     “From this far country you will however desire other
     tidings, if any. The discussions in Parliament respecting
     the religious part of the Company’s charter, give me
     much pain, as both friends and opposers evidently view
     the subject imperfectly. The opposers know full well, or
     might know, that if every servant of the Company in India
     were a clergyman, so long as we go on as heretofore, it
     would not excite an enquiry scarcely from any native;
     he would conclude it was the English _caste_, and there
     his reflections would end. On the other hand, it seems
     premature to connect the conversion of the natives with
     an ecclesiastical establishment, for unless our Bishops
     should be men, not only of learning and sobriety, but of
     zeal, they will never hold out against the discouragements
     a residence in this country presents. Indeed, in this work,
     a man must engage with the spirit of those words--“Though
     the fig-tree should not blossom;” &c. It is not that the
     evangelization of India is a hopeless project, or that to
     attempt it is attended with political danger; for the
     story General Kyd produced in the House of Commons, to
     shew the danger of interfering with the natives, is both
     erroneously stated and ridiculously applied. The idea of
     grave ministers of religion going out to shoot monkeys,
     would not have been entertained in any other connexion
     but as supplying an objection to Missions. But the young
     men were not destroyed by the natives; the elephant on
     which they rode took fright at the clamour of lamentation
     and displeasure raised by the people on the monkey being
     killed, and plunged into a deep place of the river Jumna,
     when the Howdah on which they sat getting loose from the
     elephant’s back, the young men were drowned. General
     Kyd would perhaps say, he had seen Chaplains in India
     shooting monkeys, and he should at the same time have
     the candor to state, that none of that description made
     themselves obnoxious to the natives by their religion, and
     consequently there is nothing to fear from an establishment
     of that kind. The work of evangelization is however,
     going on; the instruction of the natives already bearing
     the Christian name, opens a way for wide and lasting
     benefit. Ever since my arrival and short acquaintance
     with this country, it has appeared that natives will be
     the great means of converting their brethren. Mr. Martyn
     has done what no native could do, and what had not been
     done before,--left an idiomatical and faithful translation
     of the New Testament in the Hindoostanee language. This
     language is known pretty generally by those tribes also
     who do not use it in their usual conversation. This city
     is near the Mahratta states, and the resort of people from
     all parts of India, who all understand the tenor of this
     translation, as has been abundantly proved.”

As illustrative of the importance which Mr. Corrie attached to the
having many schools, it may be mentioned, that about the time
the foregoing letter was written, he had it in contemplation to
obtain leave of absence from Agra, with the view to visit different
stations, and to establish schools wherever it might be practicable.
With reference to such a plan, he writes


                            TO MR. SHERER.

     “I have had it in mind to ask leave of Government, to go
     to different stations to institute schools for the Native
     christian children. All that would be required would be,
     private unlimited leave of absence, with directions to
     report or not, as they might think proper. Sir George N.
     would, I think, make no objection, if the noble Earl did
     not; and if he were put into possession of the real state
     of things, I think he would rather encourage. It would be
     a peculiar glory on his government to take measures for
     bettering the state of the Native christian subjects, as
     well as of the other classes of natives; and sure I am
     that the way in which I propose to proceed, would excite
     no jealousy among the natives, but rather call forth their
     esteem for our national character.”

At this time, too, the accounts Mr. C. received of Abdool’s
proceedings at Meerut, (where the latter was on a visit), were of the
most encouraging kind. He was gratified, also, by the intelligence
that Mr. Vetch was at work at Delhi, among the Armenian and
Portuguese Christians there. The opposition to missionary labours at
Agra, had moreover, for the present ceased, whilst the schools were
prospering as much as could reasonably be expected. As however, any
changes among the chaplains would, in all probability, occasion Mr.
C.’s removal from Agra, it became an object of great solicitude to
him that so promising a state of things should not retrograde, for
want of adequate superintendence and pecuniary support; and he, in
consequence, addressed the following communication to the Secretary
of the Church Missionary Society, in England:--

                                      “Agra, E. I. Dec. 31. 1813.

     “You are made acquainted through the Rev. Mr. Thomason,
     with the labours of Abdool Messeeh, who is engaged as a
     Catechist for the Society for Missions to Africa and the
     East; and of the success attending them. Since our arrival
     at this place in March last, forty-one adults, and fourteen
     children of theirs, have been baptized into the faith of
     Christ, and all continue to walk in the truth. The prospect
     of increasing numbers is very encouraging, and as several
     of the converts are men of learning and of some influence,
     there seems ground to hope that lasting benefit is intended
     by our Almighty and most merciful Father to this place.

     “The want of useful books in their own language will,
     however, render the Native converts for a long time in need
     of European intelligence and firmness. Though the grace of
     the gospel be sufficient for their individual salvation,
     yet they are not sufficiently acquainted with the history
     of mankind, and especially of the Church of Christ, to
     enable them to calculate on the probable consequences of
     any particular mode of conduct: nor can they for some time
     reap the benefits to be derived from the experience of
     those who have gone before them in the good way.

     “I feel, therefore, anxious to call the attention of the
     Society of which you are Secretary, to this part of the
     world; and to beg, that, if practicable, a Missionary may
     be sent over to take charge of this infant church. The
     place of worship and the premises now occupied, should
     with pleasure be made over in perpetuity for the use of
     the Mission; and I think I may affirm, that the friends
     of religion in this country would find sufficient support
     for the person whom you may send, without his continuing
     burthensome to the Society.

     “Among the reasons why a Missionary should be sent to this
     country, in preference to any other, I would beg leave
     respectfully to suggest two; viz. the teeming population
     of India, and the protection of equitable laws, which put
     it in the power of a Missionary to do more good with less
     personal inconvenience here than in any other heathen
     country.

     “The objections raised at home to the evangelization of
     India, on the score of political danger, are founded in
     entire misrepresentation of the subject. It seems not to
     have occurred to either friends or foes of the measure,
     that there are none among the natives who have the means,
     whatever might be their will, of resisting the British
     Government. Almost all the ancient reigning families are
     reduced to a state of dependence: nor at any time, did
     ever the zeal of the Hindoos lead them to any formidable
     opposition even to the intolerant and avowedly proselyting
     Mahomedans: so that neither do past experience nor
     present probabilities oppose any difficulty in the way of
     publishing the gospel in India.

     “Besides, it might well be expected that reflecting men
     should discriminate between a senseless attack upon images,
     processions, &c. and the simple inoffensive statement of
     Divine truth. The former might well be expected to rouse
     every bad passion of the human mind; the latter will
     always command respect if not obedience, whilst the same
     Divine truth assures us his word shall not return void.
     Our method is to state the plain truths of the gospel with
     little or no reference to any other system called religion.
     By pointing out the Scripture doctrines of man’s fall,
     through the transgression of Adam, and his recovery by the
     Lord Jesus Christ, which appeals to matters of obvious and
     general experience, usually such a sensation is produced as
     leads some one or other to examine what foundation he rests
     upon; and the result is always, that there is salvation in
     none but in God incarnate!

     “Permit me also respectfully to solicit the attention of
     your Society to the subject of providing ministers from
     among the Native converts: for it seems out of the question
     ever to expect a sufficient number of regularly-ordained
     ministers from England. The Liturgy of our church
     translated, has been of singular benefit in this place: and
     every circumstance in the case of a church newly gathered
     from among the heathen, demonstrates that the order of
     our church is that of the primitive Christian churches.
     Whatever may be said in favour of the liberty of people
     to choose their own ministers, or in favour of extempore
     prayer, in a more advanced state of Christian education
     and experience, does not apply in our circumstances: and
     it follows of course, that a person who should be the
     means of planting the gospel in any city or place, remains
     the superintendent and umpire in all cases requiring
     arrangement. Under this persuasion it would be painful
     either to leave a native congregation without a pastor,
     or to usurp authority. I would humbly, however, request
     advice and help on this head. Abdool Messeeh seems, for
     heavenly-mindedness, discretions and zeal, to be worthy
     of the ministry: and we are endeavouring to qualify some
     promising young Christians in this place for the ministry,
     by instructing them in the learned languages of this
     country, and in Hebrew: to which we propose adding the
     study of Greek, and thus we hope they may one day be found
     worthy of Episcopal ordination.

     “The Rev. Mr. Thomason will forward this: and I trust
     no apology is necessary for endeavouring to draw the
     attention of the Society, of which you are Secretary, to
     this quarter. The opinion of one who resides on the spot,
     and whose personal safety, attachments and interests
     are much more involved in the subject than any retired
     Indian, may perhaps be considered worthy of attention,
     however insignificant the writer may be. I may be also
     allowed to express anxiety, that the church to which I
     belong may take a conspicuous part in the progressive work
     of evangelization now going on in this country; since
     she possesses facilities above all other Societies, and
     her ordinances are best calculated, in my opinion, to
     ensure edification, and that the work should not fail in
     after-generations.”

Early in January 1814, Mr. Corrie left Agra on a visit to Delhi;
and was there met by some natives from Meerut, who were desirous of
baptism. One of these was a Moonshee, in the service of Dr. R., and
who, from conversation with Abdool Messeeh, and the reading of the
translated Scriptures, had been convinced that ‘Jesus is the Son of
God.’ Another was a Molwee, a native of Rampoor, who had, in like
manner, been led to expect salvation only through Christ. A third was
an aged Birajee, who possessed great influence among the natives, but
whose faith in the Hindoo and Mahomedan systems had been completely
shaken by the deistical writings of Cuber, a satirical poet, who
lived at Benares. This Birajee had made many enquiries respecting the
Christian religion, and once thought of joining the Romish sect,
but was deterred from doing so by finding that they used images in
their worship. He had ultimately been brought to a knowledge of “the
truth as it is in Jesus,” by the perusal of the New Testament, a
copy of which, in the Nagree, he had lately obtained. For the sake,
therefore, of these and other natives, Mr. Corrie determined on a
visit to Meerut. There he had the satisfaction to find a congregation
of from twenty to thirty Christians, under the direction of Mr.
Bowley,[90] assisted by the Hukeem from Agra; and after due enquiry
and examination, he baptized the Rampoor Molwee and the Birajee,
on Sunday, January 30. On the following day Mr. C. baptized also a
native woman, and returned to Agra early in February.

It may here be mentioned, that the success with which it pleased
God to mark the labours of Mr. Corrie and his friends at Agra, made
that city a place toward which those, not unnaturally, looked for
assistance, who were anxious for the spread of the gospel among the
tribes of Northern India. Mr. C. was therefore, frequently requested
to supply, from among the converts at Agra, scripture-readers, to
be employed at other stations. In answer to an application of that
nature, he writes--


                          TO CAPTAIN PEEVOR.

                                                   “Feb. 3. 1814.

     “I have been thinking who I could send you as a reader; but
     really fear that none of those at present with me, are fit
     for the appointment. It requires some time to make them
     acquainted with the Scriptures; and some time for them to
     lay aside the old ways of thinking, in which they have been
     brought up: so that only one, like yourself, who would bear
     with them, rather than expect them to bend in all things
     to you, could be intrusted with the care of a very recent
     convert. Abdool Messeeh’s nephew is, next to his uncle, the
     most deeply humbled of the new converts; and him his uncle
     does not wish to part with, at present. I will, however,
     when we reach home, write to you further on the subject;
     for you must know we left Agra on the 10th of January, and
     have been at Delhi and Meerut.”

Yet the quick succession in which first one native and then another
had been added to the church at Agra and elsewhere, was so unusual
a phenomenon in India, that some of the friends of missions seem to
have been apprehensive, lest converts should have been admitted to
baptism, before the sincerity of their faith and repentance had been
sufficiently tested. On that point, therefore, Mr. Corrie writes in
answer


                      TO THE REV. MR. THOMASON.

     “Many kind and cordial thanks for your cautions respecting
     baptism. I have in no instance administered [that
     sacrament] but where there seemed experience, as well
     as knowledge, of the grace of God. Even the youths seem
     convinced of sin, and aware of the necessity of avoiding
     it. But the further we advance, the more arduous does my
     post become. Nothing has occurred to make me doubt the
     sincerity of any of the baptized,--but others have tried to
     deceive. I wish all the converts could remain with me; but
     it is no sin in them that they cannot live without food;
     and I cannot maintain them all.”

Mr. Corrie then adds, on the subject of scripture readers:--

     “The Hukeem discovers great reluctance to leave, but at the
     request of S. for a native Christian, he goes on Thursday
     next, and Abdool Messeeh goes with him on a visit. He will
     be in as good hands as here: his son is likely to prove
     a treasure. He is quite familiar with the Arabic of the
     Koran, is very quick of comprehension, needs seldom to have
     a lesson repeated, and is devoted to study. His frame of
     body is but weakly; and thus devotedness to learning is
     accompanied (as is generally the case) with less appearance
     of zeal for others. How few, like Martyn, live only that
     they may impart knowledge! This youth appears a sincere
     convert. He and two others are, henceforth, to have a
     lesson daily in Hebrew. In two months he has learned to
     construe the English New Testament; and purposes acquiring
     also the rudiments of Greek.”

The following extracts from letters written about this time, afford
additional evidence of that caution and godly wisdom, by which Mr.
Corrie’s missionary labours were directed:--


                        TO J. W. SHERER, ESQ.

                                            “Agra, March 4, 1814.

     “I have little to write to you about, except what is
     connected with the affairs of our Church here. The number
     of converts and present inquirers on all hands, renders
     attention to our concerns necessary that ‘the work should
     not fail.’ I do not write down the tenth part of the
     interesting particulars that come to our ears from Delhi,
     Meerut, and the Mahratta country: all which, though, if
     considered in respect of individuals, comprehends but a
     very insignificant part of the population, yet shews, I
     think, that “the report is gone forth,” and enquiry begins
     to be made. Labourers also, are, I trust, springing up,
     qualified for the work of instruction.... The Rampoor
     Molwee seems very disinterested; and is by far the most
     clever man we have yet had. The Moonshee, who accompanied
     him, is not very superior, but appears sincerely disposed
     to impart what he knows; and expresses a wish to go into
     the lately-acquired territory, towards the Seiks, where his
     family resides. At Delhi, the king’s sons, it is said, have
     got a copy of the gospels. Praised be God, nothing actually
     wrong has yet appeared in any of the converts, though
     it may be supposed that I am sometimes tired with their
     complaints and requests.”


                          TO CAPTAIN PEEVOR.

                                           “Agra, March 20, 1814.

     “I have by no means been forgetful of your wishes
     respecting a reader, but have not yet been able to
     determine anything for you. The success attending the word
     is very gratifying and encouraging; but it requires time
     to acquire information sufficient to become a teacher of
     others; so that I hesitate even to wish the new converts
     to leave this [place]: and for another reason also, [viz.]
     lest through temptation or unwatchfulness, anything amiss
     should appear in them; when you know how the enemy would
     triumph. ‘There are your converts!’ would be the cry. ‘So
     would we have it!’ But be assured, it is as much my wish as
     it can be your’s, to send the light of the gospel to you as
     fast as possible.

     “I do not know that our plan of schooling is by any means
     the most advantageous. It is simply this:--Before nine
     o’clock, the children learn by heart, catechism or grammar,
     in the way of question and answer. After that Persian; and
     after mid-day, English. This school consists of Christian
     children.... The natives are so irregular in their habits,
     and so entirely negligent of time, at the same time so
     ignorant of the advantages of regularity, and improvement
     of time, that they fly off if too much troubled on the
     subject. In this work I am often reminded of that passage,
     ‘Ye have need of patience, that having done the will of
     God, ye may receive the promises.’ May we be followers
     of them, who, through faith and _patience_, inherit
     the promises! Faith we acknowledge [to be] a heavenly
     principle, but often look for patience in ourselves; which,
     alas, is no more of ourselves than faith.”

Within a short time of the date of this letter to Captain Peevor, the
fall of two of the baptized from “their stedfastness,” occasioned Mr.
Corrie some distress, although his knowledge of the native character
had prepared him, as has been seen, to expect that offences would
sooner or later come. As regarded his own experience, however, all
outward trials and perplexities only seem to have led him to depend
more simply on the divine aid. Thus on the 10th of April 1814,
(Easter-day) Mr. C. writes:--

     “To-day I have completed my 37th year. An eventful year
     the last has been, from the spiritual enlargement of the
     Church, both among white and black. Many trials, too,
     have sprung up from the same cause; and often I am at
     my wits’ end. I find all creatures, in themselves, but
     miserable comforters; and I have, at times, a deep, deep
     feeling of the disorder and misery introduced by sin; of
     the strange perverseness and blindness of my own nature in
     particular, and of human nature in general. My own folly
     and perverseness appears, in the preference of outward
     labour and bodily exercise to spiritual obedience, and
     mental discipline. Yet, at times, I have stronger views
     than I ever had before, of the excellence of the Divine
     nature, and the blessedness of knowing, and being with God.
     I trust my heart is not weary of this work, though often
     groaning in it. God has raised pecuniary help, but the
     responsibility attached to it makes me sometimes wish to
     decline it. Mr. B. is coming to help in this work, which I
     should rejoice in: and the Molwee, from Rampoor, promises
     to be a ‘burning and a shining light.’ My dear wife grows
     in union of heart and labour with me; and, on the whole, I
     have nothing to regret but my own hardness of heart, whilst
     I would set up an ‘Ebenezer’ to my covenant God! Amen.”

It was at this time that Mr. Corrie, at the suggestion of Mr.
Thomason, addressed a letter to the committee of the Church
Missionary Society in Calcutta, on the subject of missionary
schoolmasters. In that communication he observed:--

                                            “Agra, April 6, 1814.

     “The circumstance lately come to our knowledge respecting
     the provisions in the Honourable Company’s new charter,
     for affording religious instruction to our fellow subjects
     in this country, leads me to submit the following
     considerations to your notice, to be forwarded [to
     England,] if you approve, for the consideration of the
     Church Missionary Society.

     “The state of those descendants of Europeans, and others
     professing Christianity, at the different European
     stations, has always appeared to me worthy of attention,
     both as it respects themselves, and as a medium through
     which the natives in general might be approached, with
     the greatest success. There are many persons of the above
     description at Berhampore, Monghyr, Bagulpore, Patna,
     Dinapore, Buxar, Benares, Chunar, Allahabad, Cawnpore,
     Agra, Delhi, Meerut, and other inferior stations.

     “At each of these places, a schoolmaster might be placed
     with great advantage. His ostensible, and indeed first
     duty, should be to educate Christian children, and to
     conduct public worship for native christians. The Divine
     blessing would, doubtless, attend the education of these
     children; and some of them would be led to choose the work
     of instruction; and would go forth among the natives, with
     tenfold advantage over any European missionary. As these
     people are in general very poor, the schoolmaster must
     be supplied with a maintenance, and, together with the
     christian children, should give instruction in English
     to as many children as he could attend to. The Native
     christian children might learn the principles of religion
     in Hindoostanee; and be farther instructed in the language
     of the country, by means of native instructors, under the
     superintendance of the European master; whilst the latter
     would instruct them in English, and thus open to them the
     stores of European learning. Many of the natives would
     rejoice in an opportunity of having their children taught
     English, _gratis_; and the necessary intercourse with a
     schoolmaster, for this purpose, tends greatly to remove
     prejudice, and to prepare the mind for the reception
     of Divine truth. At each of the above stations, a way
     appears to be prepared for the propagation of the gospel;
     and a soil made ready, as it were, to receive the seed of
     christian instruction, the fruits of which would spread
     through the land.

     “The modes of instruction used by our Church are, also,
     exactly suited to the state of the people professing
     christianity at these places; and they are usually as
     anxious for the prayer-book, (translated) as for the New
     Testament. If our Society could but supply labourers for
     this field, doubtless, on a proper representation of the
     subject, government would readily permit them to proceed
     hither.

     “Their Christian subjects have a claim upon government for
     such permission, to say the least: and in this way, part
     of their subjects would become attached [to them] no less
     from duty, than from interest. The professedly Christian
     part of the natives, are as little attached to us as any
     other; a sincere lover of his country cannot but wish that
     this portion of the population, at least, should be brought
     to feel common interest with us. Our civil Institutions
     have furnished much new information to the natives, on the
     subject of moral right and wrong; and from the increase of
     respectability, of late years, in the Honourable Company’s
     servants, as well as from the growth of real piety among
     them, much religious knowledge is gone abroad; add to this,
     also, the considerable distribution of translations of the
     Scriptures, in various languages, of late years. From all
     this, an attentive observer cannot but conclude, that as
     the subject of civil liberty becomes better understood by
     the natives, more political danger is to be apprehended
     from this quarter; unless it be counteracted by those
     motives to contentment, and obedience to the “powers
     that be,” which the gospel alone supplies, than from any
     temperate attempts at evangelization. Of these attempts,
     the plan of schoolmasters, such as our society could
     approve at the different stations, as above suggested,
     seems to me the least objectionable, and to imply no cause
     of irritation whatever in the natives. Whilst there is
     every ground, from reason and Scripture, to expect that the
     blessing of God would attend endeavours of this kind.”

As, also, the government of Lord Moira then professed to have in
contemplation some scheme for the education of the natives of
India at large, Mr. Corrie thought it his duty to write to Sir
George Nugent, to request that the Native christians might not be
overlooked. With reference to that important matter he observes in a
letter


                        TO J. W. SHERER, ESQ.

                                                 “April 21, 1814.

     “I fear lest the school-plan proposed [by government]
     should swallow up all the funds government can spare, in
     mere literary objects, and the gospel be left still to
     depend on the charity of God’s people. There is nothing in
     Arabic or Sanscrit, as at present studied in India, that
     can enlarge the mind or prepare it for the gospel: so that
     if Christians also are not to be educated, we shall be just
     where we were.”

But whilst Mr. Corrie was thus busily occupied with plans for the
extension and perpetuating of divine truth, his health had again
begun to decline; for in writing to his brother-in-law, he concludes
some observations on the state of religion at Agra, with the
remarks:--

     “The care of these things tends greatly to increase the
     inflammation in my side, which is as bad as ever it was at
     Cawnpore, though I trust it will, as hitherto, give way to
     medicine.”

In this expectation, however, Mr. C. was disappointed. His illness
so increased upon him, that early in July 1814, a voyage to sea was
decided upon, as the only means likely to prolong his life. In the
letters which Mr. C. wrote to his friends about this time, he speaks
of himself as being greatly tried at the thought of having “to leave
a variety of hopeful prospects and persons, without knowing how they
would terminate;” and in his Journal observes:--

     “July 31, 1814. Having been recommended by the medical
     men to go to England for the recovery of my health,
     application has been made for leave [to do so.] My mind is,
     in consequence, much occupied by the subject. Sometimes it
     is suggested that I am weary of the work, and wish to run
     away from the difficulties which the various tempers, and
     wants of the people impose upon me. But certain it is that
     my frame is so shattered that these difficulties agitate me
     more than can be conceived, and so as to prevent my gaining
     strength. On the other hand, I think the horror I feel at
     the sea-voyage, with the expence and trouble attending it,
     would prevent my undertaking it from mere self-pleasing
     motives. I feel, at the same time, so little ability to
     benefit the cause of missions at home, that I see no good,
     in that view, likely to arise from the journey. Only a wish
     to recover strength to serve God in newness of life, I
     think, is uppermost, though many base and foolish thoughts
     intrude themselves.”

Before, however, taking his departure from Agra, Mr. Corrie
administered the Lord’s Supper to fifty-nine native communicants, and
on the next day (Aug. 18th.) he committed the congregation to the
care of Mr. Bowley and Abdool Messeeh, “amid many tears on the part
of the new converts, and much sorrow on his own.” Respecting that
season of interest and solemnity, Mr. C. writes:--

     “The will of the Lord is to be acknowledged in my
     departure, no less than in my arrival at this station.
     During the preceding sixteen months, seventy-one natives
     have received baptism, of whom about fifty are adults;
     about half of them Mahomedans, and the other half Hindoos.
     Of these, one has been expelled, six have apostatized,
     four are gone to their friends, and are, we hope, holding
     fast their profession; and others are occupying different
     stations, as readers and Catechists: several catechumens
     remain to be further proved. I would remark, that exactly
     in opposition to the popular opinion among Europeans in
     India, the more learned converts, and those who had been
     Fakeers, caused us the most anxiety and trouble. In this,
     as in other respects, the Lord’s ways are not as man’s
     ways; and his gospel will make its way in this country, as
     usual, first among the poor and least regarded of mankind.”

It remains only to remark, that as the preceding pages, in connection
with the published Journal of Abdool Messeeh, make it appear, that
the moral results of Mr. Corrie’s short residence at Agra were
neither few nor unimportant; so, it is believed, that the following
observations addressed by him, soon after leaving Agra, to a friend
desirous of information respecting the natives of India, will shew,
that his labours had not been prompted by a blind or indiscriminating
zeal, but were regulated by the enlightened convictions, and feeling
heart, of a Christian philosopher.

     “The population of India consists of Mahomedans and
     Hindoos; though the majority of them are Hindoos. The
     common people of both classes, are much alike in habits,
     and superstitions. There is little that is social in the
     general religious worship of either Mahomedans, or Hindoos;
     except at certain festivals, when they resort in crowds to
     the place of assembly; and their respective processions are
     celebrated in much the same noisy and unmeaning manner.

     “In different parts of the country there are Durgahs, or
     tombs of eminent Mahomedans deceased; which are endowed
     with lands, for the support of persons to read the Koran
     at them. This is supposed to have a happy effect on the
     state of the deceased. At these places, an anniversary
     is generally observed, which is attended as a fair, by
     the people, no less than to make offerings at the shrine.
     There are certain idol temples, also, by making pilgrimages
     to which, Hindoos think they benefit deceased ancestors,
     and forward their own future happiness. At these tombs
     and temples, the priests entertain disciples, who are
     instructed in their respective creeds.

     “Except at such places, the generality of Mahomedans
     observe the times of daily prayer according to their
     inclination, wherever they happen to be. In large Mahomedan
     towns, indeed, a few assemble at the Mosques on Fridays: at
     Agra, the number, (except on festivals,) was usually six.
     The Hindoos, also, make their offerings at the idol-temple,
     at the time most convenient to themselves. So that there is
     no general appearance of religious observances among them,
     except at the festivals; when the whole country wears
     the appearance of a mountebank-show. On these occasions,
     a portion of time is given to hear the history of the
     prophet, or god, connected with the occasion; and rich
     individuals unite to pay a pundit, or learned Hindoo, who
     reads to them, usually in the evening, portions of their
     books, in a chaunting tone of voice, and explains sentence
     by sentence, to the audience, as he goes on. By such means
     the Mahomedans, especially the higher classes of them, are
     acquainted with the principal names in the Old and New
     Testaments, and with some particulars of their history;
     with the exceedingly gross intermixtures which are to be
     found in the Koran. The Hindoo books, also, contain some
     stories derived from the books of Moses, or from ancient
     tradition, mixed with much fable. These facts, on which all
     agree, serve as points on which a Christian may engage them
     in conversation, and from which by rational deduction, he
     may prove them in error; whilst the Holy Ghost alone can
     convert them to the acknowledgment of the truth.

     “The general habits of both Mahomedans and Hindoos greatly
     assimilate. They alike bathe their bodies, under the
     idea of rendering themselves more holy in the sight of
     the Deity; they alike observe the distinction of caste,
     and avoid eating with certain classes of men; they alike
     revere Fakeers, or religious mendicants; they alike pay
     adoration to the rising or setting sun, the new moon, and
     to recently-lighted lamps; and they alike implore, in their
     prayers, the intercession of deceased persons, reputed
     holy; and observe times and seasons, accounted lucky or
     unlucky. They all believe in ghosts and apparitions, and
     the active agency of evil spirits. To guard against their
     influence, they wear charms: and depend on the aid of
     some particular patron god or saint. The more religious
     enrol themselves as the disciples of some renowned holy
     man: and in sickness or under any calamity, or with a view
     to obtain some desired object, they multiply charms, or
     increase their offerings, at the tomb or temple: make
     vows, or offer in sacrifice a goat or a fowl, sometimes
     a buffalo: and on the day the Mahomedans commemorate
     Abraham’s offering up his son, a camel is sacrificed,
     the flesh of which is eagerly sought after as holy meat.
     Hence the arguments used by Abdool Messeeh, respecting
     the necessity of inward purity. The insufficiency of any
     mediator, but one that is Divine: the doctrine of the
     atonement by the sacrifice of Immanuel: the happiness of
     having an Almighty friend, patron, and protector; and
     being under the teaching and guidance of the Holy and good
     Spirit; were equally applicable to Hindoos and Mahomedans;
     and his instructions proved equally attractive to both
     descriptions of people.... The difficulties in the way of
     improving every class of native Indians, are greater than
     any one can suppose who has not been acquainted with them.
     They are not, however, of a nature to demand great bodily
     exertion or much severe privation. They arise from causes
     which require a common measure of understanding; and an
     intimate acquaintance with human nature, as described in
     holy Scripture.

     “Persons whose intercourse with the natives relates merely
     to temporal concerns, can have little idea of their
     peculiar habits and prejudices. It is thus that I account
     for the very incorrect reports respecting the religious
     state of the natives of India, and which have been
     published in England by some who resided years among them.
     I have even known men of real piety, whose situations led
     them to much intercourse with the natives, for mercantile
     and other temporal purposes, express it as their opinion
     that nothing less than a miraculous interposition could
     convert them to Christianity. I account for this from
     the circumstance, that they find such a disposition to
     chicanery and imposition, in the natives, as requires the
     exercise of a degree of authority and even of severity,
     in men dealing with them, which is unknown in England....
     From having lived always under an absolute, military
     despotism, the natives of India, beside that natural
     propensity to selfishness, which in them is uncontrolled,
     are cautious how they offend their superiors; and such
     they consider Europeans of almost every rank. They must
     have had much proof of the forbearance and gentleness of a
     white man, before they will ask questions on any subject,
     further than he appears disposed to answer; and they will
     be cautious how they answer to his questions, lest they
     should unintentionally offend.... This servile spirit does
     not give place entirely, even on conversion. It renders
     much patience and tenderness necessary in dealing with
     new converts, no less than with the unconverted. They
     have very little idea of an option being allowed them
     in things indifferent; and will often appear hesitating
     and indecisive, when their only fear is offending their
     superiors. So that the impossibility of benefitting, or
     improving the moral state of the different classes of
     [native] Christians, is asserted by many of the British,
     equally with the impossibility of the conversion of the
     Heathen.”


       [85] The youth of European descent so often mentioned in
            Mr. Corrie’s correspondence. He accepted a clerkship
            of some kind in the Company’s service, in preference
            to becoming a missionary.

       [86] Native judge.

       [87] In a letter addressed about this time to the
            correspondents in Calcutta of the Society for
            Missions to Africa and the East, Mr. C. recommends
            them ‘to advise with the society, as to the
            ordination of native ministers, without which,’
            he adds, ‘the Sacraments cannot be regularly
            administered, nor any permanency looked for in this
            work.’

       [88] A native physician.

       [89] The Bigoh or Bigga is less than an English acre.

       [90] Who afterwards became so well known as a devoted and
            eminently useful Missionary Clergyman.




                            CHAPTER XII.

                          VOYAGE TO ENGLAND.


It was on the 18th of August 1814, that Mr. Corrie left Agra. On
his way to Calcutta he paid visits to his friends at the different
stations on the river, more especially at Chunar and Benares, the
scene of his earliest ministrations in India. Whilst at the latter
place, he received intelligence that Mr. Bowley and Abdool Messeeh
were so discouraged by some difficulties that occurred soon after his
departure from Agra, that both “were ready to desist from the work
of the Lord.” This occasioned great sorrow and anxiety to Mr. C.,
inasmuch as he not only anticipated the breaking up of the native
congregation which he had been mainly instrumental in gathering
around him; but, also, that it might afford matter for triumph to the
enemies of missions. With reference to this subject, Mr. C. observed
in a letter


                            TO MR. SHERER.

     “If Abdool should give up in discouragement, my plans would
     be much set aside. But ‘Jehovah Jireh,’ must be my motto.
     This perplexity brings me often to my knees, and therefore
     I hope will work for my good. An expression of Mr. Brown,
     in our last intercourse, often occurs to me:--‘Instead of
     praying always and not fainting, we faint always and never
     pray, till we find ourselves in a strait.’”

On reaching Calcutta, Mr. Corrie found that all his medical friends
concurred in the opinion that a sea-voyage was absolutely necessary
to eradicate his disorder; but as his wife’s expected confinement
did not allow of his immediate embarkation, Mr. C. employed himself
during his stay at Calcutta, in setting on foot a school for native
christian schoolmasters. He had an opportunity too, of becoming
acquainted with Bishop Middleton, who had then recently arrived in
India, and of submitting to the consideration of that prelate, many
circumstances connected with the state of religion in that country.

On the 1st January 1815, Mr. and Mrs. Corrie went on board the H. C.
ship Europe, with the intention of proceeding, in the first instance,
to the Cape of Good Hope. But on arriving at the Cape, Mr. Corrie
was recommended to proceed to England for the benefit of the colder
climate; and with this advice he considered it his duty to comply. In
a letter to Mr. Sherer, dated from Cape Town, March 29, 1815, Mr. C.
relates:--

     “This morning I have written to the Adjutant General,
     enclosing a medical certificate of the necessity for my
     going on. Our own Surgeon N. an old practitioner here, Dr.
     H. and Dr. S. the garrison-surgeon, concur in opinion, and
     without hesitation on the subject. I ought, I believe, to
     consider this as the voice of Providence, and to acquiesce
     in it, as I hope I do. But the whole of this dispensation
     has proved the greatest trial I ever met with. I cannot
     see my way at all in it; and I go on, driven, as it were,
     by circumstances. I foresee innumerable difficulties
     before me, without one certainty of good to follow, and
     utterly despair of profiting myself or others in England.
     I am called to walk by faith more than ever: sense is all
     opposed.”

Shortly after the date of this letter, Mr. and Mrs. Corrie sailed
from the Cape for England, and after a prosperous voyage, landed at
Southampton on the 22nd June. Here Mr. C. was made acquainted for the
first time, with the publication of the Journal of Abdool Messeeh,
and the interest excited by it. He heard also, with sorrow, of the
death of Dr. Buchanan. On reaching London he was visited by several
of those friends who interested themselves with the progress of the
gospel among the Hindoos; and at an early day attended a meeting of
the Committee of the Society for Missions to Africa and the East, to
communicate to them information on missionary subjects. He was, also,
invited to attend a Committee of the London Missionary Society, to
answer enquiries respecting their prospects in India. On all these
occasions Mr. C. endeavoured to shew, that from the co-operation of
many pious individuals among the English in India; from the readiness
with which children were sent to school whenever opportunity was
afforded, and from the eagerness with which translations of the
Scriptures were received by many among the natives, there appeared
to be fair prospects of good being done among them. He pressed
upon his friends at the same time, the fact, that but little or
nothing had yet been effected in India, for want of a sufficiency
of labourers, and that nothing would be done without them; that
wherever missionaries thoroughly acquainted with the language of the
country had resided, they found plenty to do, and that though few of
the natives of India in comparison with the multitude, shewed any
concern for religion, still the number of such as did so, exceeded
the opportunities of instruction.

It was a gratifying circumstance to Mr. C. to observe, from the
eagerness with which all persons with whom he conversed, enquired
after the progress of missions among the heathen, that there had
been a great increase of zeal for the spread of divine truth, as
compared with the state of religious feeling at the time he left
England in 1806. He expressed himself, also, agreeably surprised to
find that the increased regard for sacred things which he observed
in London, was not less visible in his native village and county; in
the more orderly observance of the Sabbath, and in the attention that
was given by the gentry and clergy to the education of the poor, to
Sunday schools, and to the support of different religious societies.
On the other hand his affectionate nature was afflicted by hearing of
the death of neighbours and friends; by learning that some with whom
he had formerly “walked in the house of God as friends,” had turned
aside from the simplicity of the gospel; and by having to witness
the many other changes which the lapse of years never fails to bring
about in families and localities. Deep therefore were the emotions
called forth both in preacher and hearers, when, for the first time
after his return from India, Mr. Corrie occupied his father’s pulpit,
and urged his surviving neighbours to use the numberless changes and
trials and deaths, that had occurred since he last addressed them, as
a reason for increased anxiety to secure to themselves an enduring
inheritance.[91]

No sooner, however, had Mr. C. somewhat recruited his health, than he
visited his friends, in different parts of England; taking occasion
to plead the cause of missions, both from the pulpit and at public
meetings, as opportunities occurred. Such portions of his time,
also, as were not thus occupied, he devoted to a revision of the
Liturgy in Hindoostanee. His purpose was, if practicable, to carry
out with him to India, a reprint of that important translation, for
the use of the native Christians.

In the spring of 1816, Mr. Corrie was engaged to preach the
anniversary sermon for the Church Missionary Society in London. With
reference to that circumstance he wrote


                        TO J. W. SHERER, ESQ.

     “I am appointed to preach that sermon, which I would
     gladly have avoided: but it was said, ‘That many would
     be discouraged if I held back; for that the idea would
     be, that the subject [of missions] was not considered so
     important by us in India, as it has been represented here.’
     I therefore consented, leaving the issue to God.”

Before preaching the sermon, however, Mr. Corrie availed himself of
Mr. Simeon’s judgment and experience; and in transmitting a copy of
the manuscript to that honoured friend, he observed:--

     “I am deeply sensible of its defects. Being anxious to
     introduce a number of facts, not, as I think, sufficiently
     known, there is too little Scripture quotation; and I feel
     it to be wanting in a devotional spirit, though I hope the
     relation may occasion a feeling of compassion, and excite
     to exertion in behalf of the heathen.”

This hope seems, in some measure, to have been realized, for the
accounts given at the time, state that this sermon, which was
preached on the 30th of April, and grounded on Isaiah xliv. 20,
awakened peculiar interest.[92] As, also, it embodies Mr. Corrie’s
convictions respecting the moral condition and responsibilities of
the heathen, and developes the means which his experience led him
to regard as best calculated to rescue the Hindoo from debasing
superstitions; a brief abstract of the sermon cannot well be omitted.
Let it be observed, then, that Mr. Corrie purposed in the first
instance

     “Fairly to meet the objections made against missionary
     efforts, as if the present state of the heathen were
     unavoidable--as if they were scarcely accountable for their
     errors,--and our solicitude on their behalf were therefore
     superfluous.”

To meet objections of this kind, he goes on to trace the origin of
all false religion, and in this, observes that

     “Intercourse with heathen nations had inclined him to the
     opinion, that the original revelation made to our first
     parents after their fall, is the ground of all the worship
     offered up throughout the world. That the dispensations
     of God to Noah and to the Church before him, must have
     been known to the family of Noah, and would be remembered
     by his immediate descendants; and carried by them into
     the different countries, whither they were afterwards
     scattered. Hence, it was, he apprehended, that the custom
     proceeded, of offering sacrifices in worship, by the
     heathen tribes of every description, as the only means
     of pacifying the Evil Spirit; who, according to their
     apprehension of him, is going about seeking whom he may
     devour.

     “But there are many circumstances in the state of the
     idolatrous nations of the east, that discover a still later
     acquaintance with Divine revelation, than the time of Noah.
     Many coincidences in the fabulous histories of the Hindoos
     with the writings of the Old and New Testament, indicate
     that the forefathers of that race were not altogether
     ignorant of the subsequent circumstances of the church of
     God. Their present deplorable ignorance and error, cannot
     therefore, be said to arise from any appointment of the
     Almighty; but from their wilful neglect of those notices of
     his will with which they were originally favoured. The sins
     of the fathers are thus, in an especial manner, visited
     upon their children. The neglect of parental instruction,
     by a just connection between guilt and punishment,
     involves their posterity in ignorance, which is the
     parent of superstition, and the fruitful source of their
     miseries and their crimes. This view of the subject ought,
     therefore, to be kept distinctly in mind; that we may not
     charge God foolishly with being, in any other way than
     by the instituted order of connection between cause and
     effect, the author of that blindness of mind, and hardness
     of heart, which excludes the heathen from the divine
     favour. The declaration of God, by the prophet Hosea,
     respecting Israel, is true also of the heathen, though in a
     subordinate degree: ‘_Thou hast destroyed thyself_.’

     “These observations are in a particular manner applicable
     to the idolatrous nations of India. In their present
     circumstances, viewed by the light of revelation, they
     evidently appear ‘without God and without hope in the
     world;’ not only as they are without Christ, but as their
     own religious views and feelings render them totally
     incapable of enjoying God, or of participating in the
     happiness of the heavenly state.”

Then after reciting many of the superstitious practices of the
heathen, and shewing that the efficacy of any religious rite which
they might perform, was not regarded by them as being, in any moral
sense, dependent on the state of mind in the worshippers; whilst on
the other hand their idea of sin, being connected with the neglect
of ceremonial observances, and not with moral delinquencies,--they
allowed themselves in all kinds of sensual indulgences, without any
compunctions of conscience or feelings of shame; Mr. Corrie proceeded
to observe:--

     “How then can we avoid the conclusion, that the religious
     views and feelings even, of these miserable men, do, in the
     very nature of things, exclude them from the approbation
     of God, and incapacitate them for the enjoyments of the
     heavenly state? It is impossible that a sinner, going out
     of this world, in expectation of any thing corresponding
     with earthly honours, amusements or enjoyments, should
     not be met by disappointment and shame. It is impossible,
     that a soul utterly ignorant of holy, spiritual, and
     intellectual enjoyments, should find any place among
     ‘the general assembly and church of the first-born; the
     innumerable company of angels, and the spirits of just
     men made perfect.’ Here, therefore, the christian takes
     his firm stand against all who oppose missionary efforts.
     The heathen, not only according to the unerring word of
     God, but by the evidence of facts, are in a perishing
     condition. Without Christ, they cannot be saved. ‘He that
     hath the Son, hath life; and he that hath not the Son of
     God, hath not life.’ And myriads of these immortal spirits
     are passing into eternity, whose state and dispositions
     prove them to be utterly alienated from the favour of God,
     destitute of spiritual life, and fatally incapacitated for
     the enjoyments of a better world. For without dispositions
     suited to the enjoyments of the heavenly state, they could
     no more comprehend the happiness arising from them, even
     if admitted to a participation of heaven, than a brute can
     enjoy the pleasures of reason. And unless this be kept in
     mind, it can scarcely be hoped, that a due measure of zeal
     for the salvation of the heathen will be maintained among
     us.”

Mr. Corrie then went on to give his reasons for regarding (1st.)
The distribution of the Scriptures in different heathen languages;
(2nd.) The establishing of Missions; and (3rd.) The education of
youth; as being among the most likely means, under the Divine favour,
to further the rescue of the heathen from their perilous condition;
and he concluded by earnestly exhorting his hearers to do all in
their power to aid in a work so pressing, and involving such fearful
responsibilities.

There seems to be no doubt but that Mr. C.’s Sermon on this, as his
addresses on other occasions, whilst conveying to the religious
portion of the community, a more accurate conception of the moral
condition of the heathen world, served also to deepen the convictions
of many, that it is a primary Christian duty to be unwearied in our
efforts to bring the heathen “out of darkness into” God’s “marvellous
light.” It was plain also, from his letters and communications
with friends, that this awakened interest on behalf of missions,
acted very beneficially on his own mind. His experience whilst in
India had been such, that he had to bear up not only against the
ordinary difficulties inseparable from the missionary life, but
also against the hostility of the government, the indifference of
his fellow-countrymen in India, and the misgivings of even good
men, as to the possibility of converting the heathen. He had,
moreover, in a great measure, to maintain schools and teachers, and
scripture-readers, out of such resources as his own income and the
occasional contributions of a few Christian friends might supply. But
his residence in England had brought to his knowledge the encouraging
fact, that there were thousands in his native country, who had
become earnestly desirous of promoting the best interests of their
fellow-subjects in India. With reference to this circumstance, Mr.
Corrie had occasion to remark:--

     “I was frequently favoured to witness the lively interest
     expressed, by persons in all ranks of life, with regard to
     the state of the heathen. The bare mention of some of the
     cruelties and superstitions we daily witness, drew forth
     tears of commiseration. The news of a single soul turned
     from heathen darkness to the light of the gospel, drew
     forth bursts of praise and thanksgiving to the God of all
     grace and mercy. Nor were these empty expressions only; for
     the abundant contributions throughout Britain, for carrying
     on the work of Missions, proved that multitudes were
     sincere in those expressions of interest in the cause.”

When, therefore, after a residence of nearly two years in England,
Mr. Corrie prepared to return to his former scene of labour, he
carried with him both a deeper impression of the importance of the
work in which he had been so long engaged, and also, the cheering
consciousness that in such difficulties as might hereafter occur
in his missionary career, he would be accompanied by the prayers
and sympathies of thousands. Nor could he overlook that additional
encouragement to exertion, which had recently been supplied by
the kind and public manner, in which his labours at Agra had been
commended by the Bishop of Calcutta.[93]

It may be also here mentioned, that although the frequent public
services in which Mr. Corrie engaged, had not allowed him repose
sufficient to recruit his health so effectually as could have been
desired, yet he was unwilling to let pass any opportunity that
occurred to promote the cause of missions. Within a few days,
therefore, of his departure from England, he agreed to attend a
meeting of the Committee of the Church Missionary Society in London,
for the purpose of addressing two missionaries who were about to
proceed to India; and the next day he preached a farewell sermon at
the church of St. Mary Woolnoth.

On the 14th of April 1817, Mr. Corrie embarked on board the Carnatic,
Indiaman, with his wife and infant daughter, and the same day sailed
from the Downs. There were on board the Carnatic, besides his own
family and those of the two missionaries above mentioned, upwards of
forty passengers, and a detachment of soldiers. “We have about three
hundred souls on board,” observes Mr. C. in a letter to his father,
“but how to set about attempting their good, it is difficult to say.”
As regarded himself, Mr. C. added:--

     “A solemn, but not a painful feeling, sometimes fills my
     mind on recollecting my father’s house, and the distant
     prospect of again beholding it; but the consideration of
     the ‘house not made with hands,’ quiets every anxiety,
     and the sure and certain hope of meeting there may well
     reconcile us to temporary separation. I have had many
     thoughts of late, about the variety of religious divisions
     in England, and see clearly, that most of them arise from
     excess of spiritual advantages; and thus the means intended
     for their good, become to many an ‘occasion of falling.’
     No view of religion but what affects the heart, temper,
     and life, is of any avail for eternity. The great facts of
     the Trinity in Unity, the incarnation and vicarious death
     of the Son of God, the promise of the Holy Ghost, all
     these remain true and certain, though all men should deny
     them. The influence they have, therefore, upon my heart
     and life, is the great thing I have to attend to. If I do
     so understand and feel these truths, as to engage me in
     private, and influence me in public, the end for which they
     were revealed is effected in me; and I shall be led by them
     to the issue they promise: otherwise they serve no good
     purpose to me.”

On approaching Madeira he again wrote to his father:--

     “You will be glad to hear that we have proceeded thus far
     in safety.... Our ship is in all respects most comfortable,
     so that in all things relating to our voyage, we, as yet,
     have only cause for thankfulness. I hope we may be carried
     to our desired haven in peace, and that you will hear of
     our continued welfare in that far country; and that we
     may yet again see each other in the body, to recount new
     mercies, and to excite to renewed praises. My mind is kept
     in perfect peace; and I am enabled to keep the object of my
     calling steadily in view. Less of determination, as to what
     I shall do, than on my first going to India, but I trust a
     full determination to do what my hand findeth to do, in its
     time and season.”

In a private memorandum, Mr. C. remarks:--

     “My mind is, I think, more resolutely and deliberately
     set upon the work of the ministry in India; more disposed
     to spend and to be spent in that service; and to glory in
     it. I am in danger from the reasonableness and propriety
     that appear to me in so doing: for though it is indeed a
     reasonable thing, to offer body, soul and spirit to the
     Lord’s service, yet reason cannot enable me to do it. The
     quickening grace of the Holy Spirit can alone keep the soul
     alive to God. The experience of the Saviour’s love alone,
     constrains dull nature, even when regenerated, to activity
     in saving souls. O for more experience of a Saviour’s love!

     “May 10th. During the past week, I have had much thought
     of life, as a state of endurance, rather than enjoyment.
     We endure a ship in order to go to India: a cabin, in
     order to attain to a house: medicine, in order to health:
     the society on board, because we cannot get away: the
     inmates, in hopes of doing them good. In the view of these
     circumstances, Oh! how great does the goodness of God
     appear, in His long suffering and patience! May it lead me
     to a more entire repentance.

     “August 3rd, 1817. Came to anchor in Madras roads, at
     nine o’clock A. M. Our voyage has been very favourable,
     in respect to weather and speed. At sea, off the Cape,
     heard by a vessel, from Bengal, of the death of Mr.
     Myers:[94] this has proved a severe trial to us; but the
     certainty that he died in the Lord, prevented us sorrowing
     immoderately. Thus the Lord is mindful of us, and lays no
     heavier burden on us than we can bear.”

The Carnatic reached Madras early in August, and remained there for
ten days or a fortnight. During that period Mr. Corrie and his family
were the guests of his kind friend, the Rev. Marmaduke Thompson. In a
letter written to his brother from Madras, Mr. C. informs him that

     “There is a growing respect for religion in this place.
     Indeed, there are many instances of serious religion
     throughout the Presidency, both among the Civil and
     Military servants of the Company. The Chaplains have
     entered into a regular communication with each other in
     connection with the Committee of the Church Missionary
     Society, and at some stations things seem wonderfully
     prepared for them. At one station where Mr. Spring is,
     [Tellicherry], he found that through a native Christian,
     whom God had stirred up to read the Scriptures to his
     neighbours, thirteen of the heathen were anxious to be
     baptized, some of whom have accordingly been baptized. We
     hear too, that near Delhi, a company of about five hundred
     people had collected to converse on the subject of the
     Christian Scriptures, which had been circulated among them,
     and that they had resolved to be Christians; although they
     professed an unwillingness to associate with the English,
     on account of their eating all kinds of food. I hope they
     will learn the ways of God more perfectly.”

The Carnatic sailed from Madras on the 20th of August, and arrived at
Calcutta by the end of that month.


       [91] Mr. Corrie’s text on the occasion alluded to, was 1
            John ii. 17.

       [92] See Missionary Register for 1816, p. 185.

       [93] See Bishop Middleton’s Sermons and Charges, p. 197.

       [94] Mrs. Corrie’s father.




                            CHAPTER XIII.

                         RETURN TO CALCUTTA.


Although Mr. Corrie, at the time he landed in India, was one of the
Senior chaplains in Bengal, and on that account had a claim to reside
in Calcutta, yet as a junior chaplain had been appointed to the
Presidency during Mr. C.’s absence from the country, it was decided
that the latter should proceed to one of the out-stations, until a
vacancy should again occur in Calcutta. To Mr. C. was accordingly
assigned the chaplaincy at Benares. Before, however, he proceeded
to that station, he addressed himself to the work of missions; the
natives as usual flocking around him. In reference to that object, he
writes to his brother:--

                                        “Calcutta, Sep. 22. 1817.

     “I find a great progress in public opinion respecting
     the spread of the gospel. A Diocesan Committee,[95] and
     School-Book Society,[96] and Hindoo College,[97] are
     formed; in addition to the Bible Society, and Church
     Missionary Committee, before existing; considerable
     exertions, also are making to enlarge the Free School,[98]
     which now boards, clothes and educates upwards of two
     hundred children. But notwithstanding all these favourable
     appearances, vital religion has even more than ever to
     struggle with; a form of godliness without the power of
     it; a scheme of doctrine approaching to the truth, but
     still not the truth itself, is the fashion of the day. True
     religion does however make way, though it ‘cometh not with
     observation.’”

On Sunday, 12th of October, Mr. Corrie preached a sermon at the Old
Church in Calcutta, on behalf of the Church Missionary Society. This
seems to have been the first discourse delivered from the pulpit
of the Established Church in India, with a professedly missionary
object;[99] and was on that account not without its effect. After the
service, a native-convert was baptized by the name of Fuez Messeeh.
This person had come from Bareilly to Calcutta, and had been for
several months under Christian instruction. The account which he gave
of himself to Mr. Corrie was, that at the age of eighteen, being
disgusted with the idolatry of the Hindoos, he became a Mahomedan,
and lived so strict a life as to gain many disciples by his reputed
sanctity. That finding no peace of mind amid the practice of all
kinds of austerities; and having, in the meanwhile, heard much of
the gospel, he contrived to obtain a copy of Martyn’s Hindoostanee
New Testament; that he read it, and was led “to know and feel that
there is none other name under heaven, given among men, whereby he
must be saved, but only the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.”

It was on the evening of Nov. 17, 1817, that Mr. Corrie left Calcutta
for Benares. The following are extracts from his Journal at this
time:--

     “We have in company, Abdullah, baptized in England; Fuez
     Messeeh, baptized in Calcutta; Noor Messeeh, baptized
     at Agra; a Christian Khidmutgar,[100] baptized at the
     Lall-Bazaar Chapel [in Calcutta]; Khristnoo, baptized
     at Agra; the five Christian youths, under the patronage
     of the Church Missionary Society; and several Christian
     families. During the 19th and 20th, we had an opportunity
     of witnessing two distressing instances of the unfeeling
     conduct of the Hindoos, towards the sick and dying. On
     one occasion, two women were employed, at the river-side,
     filling the mouth of a child with mud. Miss B. asked them
     if the child were ill? One of them answered, ‘Yes.’ Miss
     B. ‘You are going to kill it outright.’ On which they
     began to laugh, and talk with each other; and prosecuted
     their work of death. Farther on, a sick man was laid, with
     several people sitting round. A young and handsome Brahmin
     was attempting to bind a weight round his neck, in order to
     sink him in the river, which the sick man was resisting,
     with marks of much remaining strength. Abdullah called out,
     ‘Take him into some warm place, and he will recover:’ to
     which the Brahmin answered, with a significant nod, ‘Aye,
     Aye, we will put him into a warm place:’ on which the
     persons around laughed aloud. On the evening of the 21st,
     Fuez Messeeh, whilst walking on the bank of the river,
     said among other things, that ‘at times he experienced
     such delight in contemplating the love of Christ, that no
     relish remained for earthly things.’ Noor Messeeh, (who
     appears truly a partaker of the grace of Christ) joined
     us; and after some time asked, with seeming interest,
     ‘Whether if a person sinned after believing in Christ, he
     might hope for forgiveness?’ One of the Christian youths
     enquired, ‘Whether if a person did not believe in Christ,
     and yet practised virtue, his virtue would be accepted of
     God?’ These questions seem to me, to explain the doctrine
     contained in the xvi. and xviii. Articles of our Church.
     The situation of native Christians, in respect of the
     Mahomedans and Heathen, point out to them the necessity
     of faith in Christ, in order to acceptance with God; and
     at the same time, teaches them the inefficacy of a mere
     profession of Christianity.

     “Sunday 24th. Our Christian congregation consisted of
     seventeen. Fuez Messeeh read first the 116th Psalm, and
     afterwards the xvi and xviith chapters of St. John. He
     was himself evidently affected by the repeated references
     to our Lord’s divinity, and spoke to the others on that
     subject; and of the great condescension of the Saviour, in
     becoming the surety of sinners; with the love that ought to
     subsist among Christians: saying, ‘they ought to be as the
     eyes in the head, which though they dwell in two sockets,
     yet were intent always on the same objects; and constituted
     but one organ of vision.’

     “At Augurdeep. In the evening went into the village, where
     is a celebrated Idol temple. Fuez Messeeh entered into
     a dispute with a Brahmin, before twenty-five or thirty
     people, assembled for poojah (worship.) The Brahmin was
     forced at length to confess that Idolatry was inexcusable:
     on which an appeal was made to the bystanders, who declared
     that the Brahmins led them astray.

     “Dec. 22nd, at Bauglipore. Visited the Roman Catholic
     Christians here, whom we found still in great poverty, and
     complaining of the neglect of their priests. Gave Augustine
     Clementis (who professes to wish for a school and has
     several children of his own) ten rupees towards erecting
     a shed, and engaging a schoolmaster, with a promise of
     further assistance. Left with him, for the use of the
     intended school, one copy of the New Testament in Persian,
     one copy in Hindoostanee, and one copy of the Psalms in
     Persian. Gave him also a copy of the Psalms, and some
     copies of family prayers, in Hindoostanee, for distribution.

     “Buxar, Jan. 18, 1818. Had divine service this morning
     in English, and baptised an Israelite, aged fifty-five,
     who has been long in our military service, and who seems
     spiritually alive to the true character of Christ, as
     the promised Messiah. In the afternoon had service in
     Hindoostanee. Twenty-five adults, beside our own people,
     attended. The anxiety manifested by several of the Jews
     for religious instruction, is very pleasing; and must, if
     possible, be gratified. May the Lord raise up a suitable
     teacher; and direct and prosper me in my wishes to erect a
     place of worship for them!”

No sooner had Mr. Corrie arrived at Benares, (Jan. 26. 1818.) than
he projected a missionary establishment in the neighbourhood of
that large and populous city. The following extract from a letter
addressed to the secretary of the Calcutta Committee of the Church
Missionary Society, will explain the objects he had in view:--

     “Three native Battalions are usually cantoned here; two
     are now at the station. I have been taking measures for
     the establishment of a school for the younger drummers
     and fifers, and for the children of native Christians
     attached to these Corps. I have already twenty-four
     names of children, whose parents desire that they should
     become scholars too. We also, on Sunday [Feb. 8th.] began
     Hindoostanee worship, and about fifteen of the above
     class attended. For the school, I have met with a small
     bungalow conveniently situated, offered for six hundred
     rupees. In this bungalow Mr. Adlington could also reside
     for the present. I beg, therefore, that the Committee will
     consider whether they can adopt this bungalow and premises
     for a Missionary residence; or whether they would wish
     Mr. Adlington to reside altogether in Benares; and that
     premises should be procured for him there on his return
     from Agra?[101] Let me repeat, then, that at this place
     there are immediate calls on the Society for assistance;
     and that not merely in the hope of probable benefit, but
     from the actual wants of professing native Christians;
     whilst many of the natives, Mahomedan and Heathen, are
     awakened to discern the importance of Christianity, and
     will probably be encouraged or discouraged by the readiness
     or otherwise which we manifest in meeting these wants of
     our Christian brethren.”

Mr. Corrie had the satisfaction to find that the Committee in
Calcutta readily entered into his views, and authorized him to
purchase the premises referred to in the preceding letter. He was
thus enabled to open a school, to the support of which many of the
European residents at Benares contributed, by monthly benefactions
and subscriptions.

Early in February Mr. Corrie visited Chunar, his first station in
India, and where the native church was now under the care of Mr.
Bowley. It appears from the report he sent to the Calcutta Committee
of the Church Missionary Society, that Mr. C. found the mission at
Chunar in a satisfactory state. Under date of Feb. 9, 1818, he writes:

     “On the 5th instant I went to Chunar: it was rather late
     in the evening when I arrived, but I found several of the
     converted Hindoos waiting to see me. Next morning at seven
     o’clock, about eighty of the native Christians attended for
     divine worship. They began by singing a hymn, in the native
     measures, on the sufferings of Christians. The regularity
     with which they sung, and the earnestness most of them
     manifested, greatly affected me. Mr. Bowley expounded the
     Parable of the Wise and Foolish Virgins; and concluded the
     service with prayer. Among other things, he prayed for a
     blessing on the king, and on his nobles in England, and
     in India. I mention this not as a proof of Mr. Bowley’s
     loyalty, for that was known long before, but to shew how
     the labours of such men tend to attach the natives of India
     to the British nation, by uniting their most important
     interests. At ten o’clock, about one hundred Europeans
     attended divine service in English; after which, twelve
     of their children were baptized, and eleven marriages
     celebrated. At three p. m., the native congregation again
     assembled to the number of about ninety adults; when, after
     evening prayer, I endeavoured to explain to them and apply
     the second Psalm. It appears that the usual number of
     Europeans who attend Divine service regularly in English,
     is about forty, and the usual number of native Christians
     who attend worship in Hindoostanee, is about seventy or
     eighty. The number in both congregations has been gradually
     and regularly increasing, and testifies of itself to the
     diligence and exemplary conduct of Mr. Bowley, and of the
     blessing attending his labours. The little I was able,
     in my short visit, to see of the state of the people,
     impressed me deeply with the value of his labours. I knew
     the degradation of both European invalids and their native
     wives and families, from three years residence among them,
     and now to behold so many of them adorning by their lives
     the doctrine of God our Saviour, was to me most gratifying,
     and will be considered an ample recompence for all their
     contributions, by the supporters of our Society. There
     being but one place for both the free-school and the
     congregation to assemble in, I could not see the scholars
     at their tasks. Three or four children of parents, who
     can afford it, pay half a rupee per month; with which,
     together with voluntary contributions of some of the pious
     soldiers, Mr. Bowley has provided wall-shades for evening
     service, and supplies the lights. I, also, conversed at
     Chunar with ten Hindoos, who appear to be fully convinced
     of the truth of Christianity, though not yet prepared to
     encounter the consequences of an open profession [of it].
     Some of them even join Mr. Bowley occasionally in prayers.
     One of them, on being asked, what he considered the great
     peculiarity of the Christian religion? answered, That in
     every other system of religion, works were made a condition
     of justification, but that in Christianity, only faith in
     Christ is required; whilst, wonderful to say, it produced
     more exemplary holiness than any other system.”

By a statement which Mr. Corrie put in circulation at Secrole, dated
11th of March, it will be seen that he was not unmindful of the
duties connected with that station:--

     “It having been found on enquiry, that many children of
     Christians, chiefly connected with the native battalions,
     were without the means of instruction, a school was
     established in the lines, in the month of February, for
     their benefit, which now consists of the following number
     and description of scholars:

      4 Adult Christians, learning to read Hindoostanee in the
        Nagree character.
      2 Adult Hindoos, learning to read English.
      4 Young men, who were educated for a short time in the
        Orphan school.
      4 Christian youths, who with the last-mentioned, form
        one class in reading, writing, and casting accounts.
      5 Christian boys, who read the New Testament, and write.
     10 Christian boys, learning first lessons in English reading
        and writing.
      2 Mahomedan boys, learning first lessons in English reading
        and writing.
      8 Christian girls, learning to read English.
     --
     39”

Of the above-mentioned boys, eight, it was stated, were orphans, or
the children of parents who were too indigent to maintain them; the
consequence was that they had to be provided with sustenance as well
as education. To the school was also attached a Christian Moonshee,
whose office it was to read the Scriptures morning and evening,
to as many Christians as chose to attend; and on Sundays, to read
the service of the Church of England, and a previously-prepared
exhortation, (both in Hindoostanee) to the native Christians in the
lines, of whom about thirty or forty, with their children, were in
the habit of regularly attending.

The object of this statement was to make the European residents at
Benares acquainted with the missionary operations in progress among
them, and to afford them “an opportunity of contributing to the
support of measures, the beneficial tendency of which they were so
well able to appreciate.” The result was that the schools at Secrole
received such an increase of patronage, as to be almost wholly
supported by local contributions.

About the middle of March, Mr. Corrie again visited Chunar. In a
letter from Benares, dated March 24, 1818, he writes:--

     “I attended at Chunar last week. On Good Friday, we
     first had divine service in English, in a barrack; and
     afterwards in Hindoostanee, at the Free-school. The number
     of communicants after the first service, was seventeen.
     Of the native congregation, twenty-seven females and two
     men remained to commemorate the death of our Lord. Almost
     the whole congregation were in tears during the sermon, in
     which Mr. Bowley set before them the Saviour’s sufferings:
     and during the communion, the greater number appeared to be
     deeply affected, and all of them exeeedingly serious and
     attentive. There was an evident blessing vouchsafed to us,
     and, in my own case, a lively sense of the Divine presence,
     which seemed also to pervade the whole congregation. Friday
     before, I heard thirty-two native Christians read, who
     have within these few months, most of them, and all of
     them since Mr. Bowley came to Chunar, begun to learn, some
     the Persian, others the Nagree character; and some of them
     now read the Scriptures in Hindoostanee, with fluency, and
     all of them expressed much delight arising from their new
     attainment. Indeed, a remarkable tenderness of conscience
     seems to distinguish most of them; and their altered
     exemplary conduct is the talk of all, and as usual, by some
     ridiculed, and by others commended.

     “On Thursday, I catechised the first class in the
     Free-school, consisting of seven boys, who not only
     repeated their catechism correctly, but answered very
     intelligently many questions I asked them, arising out of
     the catechism. They also repeated passages of Scripture,
     which they got off as tasks, and the whole class repeated
     verse by verse, the thirteenth chapter of Proverbs. Some of
     the children in the Free-school, and their mothers, who are
     amongst the most exemplary of Mr. Bowley’s congregation,
     are the families of non-commissioned officers belonging
     to native corps now in the field. It must strike every
     reflecting mind what a comfort establishments such as
     that of the Church Missionary Society at Chunar, must be
     to Europeans of the above class. If instead of leaving
     their wives and children comparatively unprotected, and
     exposed to the temptations of this heathen land, they could
     place them where their children might receive education
     at little or no expense, and their wives be receiving
     good instruction, instead of being left to every wind of
     temptation, surely much of the pain arising from separation
     in time of war would be alleviated.

     “The school-room being too small to contain the Native
     congregation, and encouraged by the Committee’s[102]
     approbation of my wish to build a larger house for their
     accommodation, I desired Mr. Bowley to look out for a
     proper spot to build upon. A house and premises, contiguous
     to the barracks, the owner refused to dispose of to us;
     and this led us to fix upon a spot about two hundred yards
     further from the barracks, and on two sides bounded by the
     Native town. The possessor, Mr. Turnbull, was applied to
     for it, and he begged Mr. G. Robinson to go up and fix a
     price on it. Mr. R. accordingly went with me last week and
     valued the premises at 500 Rupees. On this being reported
     to Mr. Turnbull, he generously wrote, saying, that he
     begged I would accept the ground for the purpose intended.
     This, I hope, is a token for good, and may be taken as
     an encouragement to proceed.... I think there will be no
     difficulty in raising 4 or 5000 Rupees for our intended
     church.”

Mr. Corrie had the happiness to find that these anticipations
were not premature, for on a subscription paper being put into
circulation, the Marquis of Hastings was pleased to head the list of
contributions by a donation of 1000 sicca rupees, towards building a
church at Chunar.

Encouraging, however, as was this improved state of feeling in favour
of missionary labours, there remained abundant scope for the exercise
of christian zeal. In a letter, addressed to his brother about this
time, Mr. Corrie writes from Benares:--

     “In a neighbouring district (with the magistrate of which I
     am well acquainted) during the last year, two widows were
     burned on an average every month; six lepers were buried
     alive, or drowned, by their friends; and not less than
     one hundred persons destroyed themselves by drowning, in
     fits of passion, under the idea that their ghosts would
     haunt the offending party. Such being the strength of
     passion in them, you will not be surprised that murders
     are exceedingly frequent: and, what is worst of all, their
     religion encourages these excesses.... The progress of the
     gospel is slow, but advancing. The unholy rivalry of some
     who differ from us in modes of worship is a stumbling-block
     to a few; and it grieves me to be often obliged to spend
     my time and my breath in proving the lawfulness of
     infant-baptism, and the propriety of baptism by sprinkling.
     Satan thus divides, but he shall not finally prevail.”

It was now the will of God to exercise the faith and patience of His
servant, by a no less severe affliction than the death of an only
son. How great this trial proved to Mr. Corrie, will be seen from his
letter on that occasion--


                            TO MRS. MYERS.

                                                  “April 9, 1818.

     “Our dearest Grandmama will have heard the melancholy
     tidings communicated to Mr. Sherer yesterday. I judged it
     best, that, if possible, the heavy affliction should not
     come upon you suddenly. Your still bleeding heart will more
     severely feel this arrow of the Almighty, winged no doubt
     with love, but piercing to the very quick. Our lovely boy
     was becoming inexpressibly interesting. He was taken with
     a severe attack nearly three weeks ago, which yielded to
     strong medicine, though he never was after as before, but
     seemed mending, when by some means, he caught a severe
     cold. The doctor says it was of the nature of Influenza,
     and many in the house have suffered from it. On Saturday
     morning we sent for the doctor; medicines did not produce
     the wished-for effect, and we had a very restless night
     on Saturday. On Sunday morning my heart began to sink on
     his account, and the Lord’s prayer in Church tried both my
     principles and my feelings.

     “Throughout Sunday, little alteration appeared; but he
     rested so well on Sunday night, that the doctor on Monday
     morning pronounced him out of danger. About eleven he
     altered for the worse. His little sweet countenance
     assumed an appearance of eagerness, and about twelve he
     was manifestly convulsed, though not strongly. On this,
     our doctor called in another skilful medical man, who
     happened to be at the station, and new medicines were tried
     which promised partial relief, and the fond mother began
     again to hope. About twelve on Monday night, he was in
     great pain, and the work of death was evidently rapidly
     going on. We commended him to our covenant God in prayer.
     I pleaded, as well as I was able, His promise to be the
     God of our seed, as well as our own God. I prayed for the
     child as a member of Christ’s mystical body and a branch
     of the true Vine; and besought that the suffering child
     might be remembered in the suffering Christ. Our prayers
     were mercifully heard, and our babe from that time suffered
     comparatively little. About five on the morning of the 7th,
     his soul seemed longing to mount upward. We again in prayer
     commended him to our covenant God, and about half-past
     five, he ceased to breathe without a struggle or even a
     sigh.

     “It seemed to me inconceivable that my mind should ever
     have become so confused respecting the truths of Scripture.
     During the whole of Tuesday, and on Tuesday night
     especially, I became alarmed lest any thing extravagant
     should escape me. My God ever graciously kept me from
     bringing a reproach on the principles I preach: but O! I
     seem only now to have begun to understand many of them. I
     now know what is meant by the _bread_ of affliction, and
     the _water_ of adversity: I now understand the 38th Psalm
     in a way I never did before; and though even at this moment
     no one Scripture could I point to, and say that it supports
     me, yet, I feel myself on safe ground, and seem secured on
     all sides from danger.

     “I hope the bitterness of this death is past to us both,
     though our bereavement (as I conceive it ought not) will
     never be forgotten. We are constrained to abstract our
     thoughts from the lovely object that bound our affections
     so fast; and do, we hope, rejoice in his gain, whilst we
     mourn our sad loss. My understanding yesterday received
     a lesson from Anna. When we sat down to the ceremony of
     dinner, she became raving for water. Sometimes it was ‘Dear
     papa, give Nana some water.’ Then with a curtsey to nurse,
     ‘Please Nan, give Nana some water.’ Then with anger crying
     for water; but though our hearts were bleeding for her
     distress, we would not give her water for her hurt. Thus,
     thought I, our heavenly Father is looking down upon us.
     He heard our prayers, our tears for the life of our babe;
     He saw our distress, and He doubtless pitied, but for our
     good, denies our desires. Oh, may the Holy Spirit send home
     the lesson effectually!

     “On entering the pulpit on Sunday morning in heaviness of
     heart, when I pronounced the sentence ‘Our Father which art
     in heaven,’ it powerfully came to my mind, ‘Is he less a
     Father than thou art, that he should not care for thee and
     thy child?’ Lord! I believe, help my unbelief!”

In acknowledging the christian sympathy of Captain Peevor, expressed
in connection with this domestic sorrow, Mr. C. writes:--

     “We try to realize the truths you kindly bring before us;
     but it is hard to walk by faith when sense and sight so
     powerfully attract the contrary way. We are not, however,
     without experience of the grace of our Lord; and hope the
     lesson intended may not be lost upon us. One day in this
     school of adversity, has taught me more than years of ease
     and prosperity.”

It was now, also, that Mr. Corrie communicated with


                        THE REV. J. BUCKWORTH.

                                        “Benares, March 14, 1818.

     “You will see by the date, where I am stationed. The place
     is important, on many accounts. It is central, and near
     several missionary stations: but we want helpers at Chunar,
     my first station in India. Mr. Bowley’s labours have been
     greatly blessed to the christian part of the population;
     who were ‘as sheep without a shepherd,’ till he went among
     them. Mr. Adlington is at this time visiting dear brother
     Abdool; of whom he writes very favourable accounts, as
     to spiritual things; but his bodily health has greatly
     declined, and is declining. A few have been added to the
     church at Agra; and several bearing the christian name,
     seem to have experienced a new birth unto righteousness.
     With respect to the public state of affairs, you will
     hear of the wonderful events which have taken place here,
     during the last six months; by which the whole continent
     of India is become subject to British authority.[103] Very
     critical have been our circumstances repeatedly, at one
     place 1200 of our troops were assaulted by a greater number
     of thousands--at another place, 3,000 of our troops were
     set upon by 40,000; and such is the inconstant nature of
     the natives of this country, that in either of the above
     affairs, had victory declared against us, the whole of
     India would have been in a flame. This, then, is the Lord’s
     doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes. We have many
     praying souls now in our Indian army; and the number is
     increasing: and we know that our God is a hearer of prayer.”

     “April 9. Since I began my letter, it has pleased God to
     relieve you of the charge we put upon you, respecting our
     Infant.[104] He was removed from our sight on the 7th, and
     is now with his Father and our Father, with his God and our
     God. I know not how to write about anything else, but yet I
     wish not to fill my paper with the expression of feelings
     which, no doubt, every one in similar circumstances
     experiences. I shall only say, that I seem never to have
     known sadness till now.”

This extension of the British rule in India, by opening out wider
fields for missionary exertions, rendered, also, the want of
labourers more sensibly apparent. Hence Mr. Corrie writes


                       TO THE REV. MR. SIMEON.

                                         “Benares, June 16, 1818.

     “I write now to acquaint you with the death of one of our
     chaplains at Cawnpore on the 22nd instant, that you may, if
     possible, get some proper person appointed in his place.
     Our honoured friend Mr. Grant, will not be backward to use
     his influence, if it can avail--and may God grant, for the
     honor of his gospel in these lands, that a true minister
     of his word may be sent out. It is inconceivable to those
     not on the spot, how much pious _well-educated_ men may
     effect, above the usual run, even of pious men who come
     out as missionaries. If translations be to supply the gift
     of tongues, then those translations ought to come as near
     the character of that gift as possible. Now the Serampore
     translations all, I fear, fail entirely in idiom and
     every recommendation. Of their Hindoostanee translation,
     I can speak from some knowledge, that it is calculated to
     displease the least fastidious, by the mixture of Persian,
     Arabic, and English words in it, as well as by the turn
     given to many phrases, from the literal rendering from
     the English. Thus, ‘on these two hang all the law and the
     prophets,’ the word used is literally, ‘suspended as from a
     peg.’ Such is my own feeling respecting this translation,
     that I should abstain from giving it to an intelligent
     Hindoo, and no other could make anything of it; and at
     this place, we have, in consequence, nothing to meet the
     enquiries of the Hindoos, except a catechism translated by
     Mr. Bowley, which is read with avidity.

     “Divine providence is, I hope, opening a door of great
     usefulness here, through the means of the Baboo Joy
     Narian--a kind of Deist, who is about giving up a house,
     and £5,000. to endow it as a school, to our Church
     Missionary Society. The house in Benares we have actual
     possession of, and it is now undergoing a little repair,
     with a view to commence a school of general learning, of
     which Mr. Adlington will be the superintendent.”

The name of Joy Narain will be remembered, as that of the rich native
at Benares, who, some years ago, sent a letter and a benefaction
to the Bible Society.[105] It appears that the same benevolent
individual had at that time formed, also, the design of building and
endowing a free-school, by means of which the poorer classes of his
countrymen might receive education.[106] He seems to have gone so
far as to have himself drawn up a plan of the institution, to have
commenced building a suitable house, and to have offered to pay for
the support of a schoolmaster and assistants; but, from some cause
or other, nothing had been definitely settled up to the time that
Mr. Corrie was appointed chaplain at Benares, after his return from
England. Soon after Mr. C.’s arrival at that station, however, Joy
Narain brought the subject of the free-school before him; and the
following extract from a letter addressed by Mr. C. to the committee
of the Church Missionary Society, gives the substance of what passed
between Joy Narain and himself:--

     “He proposes giving a large house in the city for a school,
     endowing it with 200 Rs. a month, (about £300. a year,)
     Mr. Adlington to be the teacher. I suggested to him to
     let us have the house on Mr. Adlington’s arrival [from
     Agra,] to begin operations; and that for the present Mr.
     A should derive his support from the Church Missionary
     Society, whilst he (Joy Narain,) should pay for books and
     incidental expenses. This seemed to delight him. I proposed
     that he should make the Church Missionary Society’s
     committee trustees of his endowment; reserving to himself
     the approval of their agent, who, if approved of at the
     end of one year, should be confirmed for life; or, during
     conformity with the rules of the endowment; which, I
     proposed, should be for general learning: our Missionary
     to be at liberty to receive enquirers after truth, in his
     private apartments, after school-hours.”

To these several propositions, Joy Narain cordially assented, and
although at the date of the foregoing letter to Mr. Simeon, the
property was not legally made over, yet the school-house had been
put into the possession of the Church Missionary Society. The school
itself was opened on Monday, July 17, 1818, under the superintendence
of Mr. Adlington; the second master being a young man, country-born,
but educated in England, and intimately acquainted with the
colloquial language and manners of the natives. Mr. Corrie observes,
however, to the Committee of the Church Missionary Society:--

     “To give full effect to this gift of Joy Narain, you must
     send us one or two men of as good education as possible,
     and as soon as you can find them. The disposition to
     hear and receive the word, is increasing daily among the
     natives. Many of the rich and learned Hindoos, especially
     of this city, seem ready to welcome the gospel.”

And again to the Committee in Calcutta:--

     “A man of learning should by all means be sent out to that
     school, both to release Mr. Adlington, and to occupy a
     post than which there is none more conspicuous in all the
     sphere of missionary labour; and, it ought, therefore, to
     be supplied accordingly.”

It was whilst engaged in watching over the first beginnings of this
Institution, that Mr. Corrie wrote to his brother,

                                                  “July 29, 1818.

     “This country becomes daily more and more interesting to
     the christian. The paramount influence of our government
     now seems to hold out some degree of permanency to our
     rule; and, in consequence, the natives are less embarrassed
     with the fear of the return of former superiors; and
     the consequent persecution that would have followed any
     attention to our religion. Considerate men among them,
     therefore, begin to speak out their dissatisfaction with
     Idolatry; and to enquire what better we have to offer
     them. This disposition is most providentially met by the
     institutions which have risen amongst us of late: and
     the hand of God in disposing all things for the spread
     of His truth, seems evidently displayed. First, there
     is the Diocesan Committee, which confines itself to
     supplying those only who understand English, with bibles,
     prayer-books, and tracts. Next, the Church Missionary
     Society, which supplies the native christians with bibles,
     and prayer-books in the native languages: as well as
     its more direct objects. Then the School-Book Society,
     which supplies elementary books in all languages, for
     all description of persons; and then the glorious Bible
     Society, like the ‘lion which covereth,’ embracing all
     classes and climes, in the distribution of the words
     of life eternal. If to these be added, the labours of
     missionaries of different denominations, it will appear
     that the kingdom of God is near to India. Of missionaries,
     however, we have as yet, but a scanty supply. May the Lord
     of the harvest, thrust forth labourers into India.

     “In the beginning of this month I baptized, at Chunar, a
     Brahmin, and a Moonshee, in the presence of the native
     christian congregation, and of many Heathen and Mahomedans.
     The Brahmin declared that he had visited all the places
     reputed holy by Hindoos, from Brindrinath in the borders
     of the snowy mountains in the N. W., to Juggernauth in
     the lower parts of Bengal, but found nothing on which his
     mind could rest, till he heard the gospel at Chunar. That
     he found all the Hindoos in error, and plainly told them
     so; in proof of his being in earnest, [he] broke off the
     Brahmin’s cord, (or, as he called it, ‘the lying cord,’)
     before them all. The Moonshee bore a similar testimony
     respecting the insufficiency of the Mahomedan faith.[107]
     Three more are waiting for my next visit to Chunar in
     order to be then baptized.... These are encouraging
     circumstances; may God grant us his blessing to improve
     them to his glory!”

But besides relating such encouraging circumstances as these, Mr.
Corrie’s correspondence contains many incidental notices, also, of
his intercourse with natives of all classes. Thus on the 18th of
August, he informs Mr. Sherer:--

     “We are going on as usual here, doing a little: ‘unknown
     and yet well known.’ Several of the high Natives have
     visited me lately; chiefly from the intimacy they
     perceived Mr. Bird[108] had formed with us; but it led,
     though they meant it not, to religious discussions. A near
     relation of the Rajah of Benares, took away yesterday a
     Hindoostanee New Testament, and Hindoostanee Prayer-book,
     with evident desire, after a long discussion on subjects
     connected with them.”

And, again, in writing to the same relative in the month of October,
Mr. C. observes:--

     “Joy Narain’s school goes on very well. Many of good
     caste and family now come for instruction in English. The
     enquiries they make on religious subjects, have led to the
     conviction, in several, of the folly of idolatry. Indeed, I
     am obliged to refrain at times from talking with them, lest
     the whole design should be obstructed by the rapid progress
     some of them are making in Christian knowledge.”

The school here mentioned, having, by Deed, bearing date Oct. 21,
1818, been legally placed under the control of the Calcutta Committee
of the Church Missionary Society and their successors, Mr. Corrie
was requested by Joy Narain to draw up, in English, a detailed
statement of the plan and objects contemplated by the school. A
draft of the statement was, in the first instance, [11th Nov. 1818.]
submitted by Mr. Corrie to the Agent of the Government at Benares,
and was afterwards translated into several of the languages of the
country, and circulated among the natives of India. As illustrative
of a remarkable moral movement, towards the maturing of which the
subject of these memoirs materially contributed, the document is too
important to be omitted.

     “The following statement of the object and plan of the
     Institution, is published, with a view to engage such
     support as may enable the managers to extend to the utmost
     the benefits it is intended to convey.

     “1. In this school, four languages are taught, viz.
     English, Persian, Hindoostanee and Bengalee.

     “2. For the purpose of affording instruction in these
     languages, an English master, as superintendent of the
     Institution, is engaged; proper assistance and learned
     teachers in the other languages respectively, are also
     retained.

     “3. It is intended to maintain, as well as educate, a
     number of poor boys, who are to be accommodated in the
     house, as soon as proper arrangements can be made, and a
     small daily allowance will be made to such poor boys as
     cannot be received into the house, to such extent as the
     funds may admit of.

     “4. The benefits of the Institution to be at the same
     time open to all who are desirous of availing themselves
     of them, without regard to caste or country; and for this
     purpose, teachers, paper, pens and ink, will be provided
     gratis, for all the scholars; it being left to the option
     of such parents as can afford to pay for their children’s
     education, to contribute at their pleasure to the general
     expenses of the school, and thereby to extend the benefits
     of it further to the poor.

     “5. The primary design of teaching the above languages
     being, to enable industrious youths to obtain for
     themselves a comfortable livelihood, the first care
     will be to instruct the scholars in reading and writing
     grammatically, and in the most necessary rules of
     arithmetic; together with the government regulations on the
     subjects of police, and ordinary affairs: after which such
     youths as desire further improvement, may be instructed in
     general history, geography, and astronomy.

     “6. No scholar to be admitted into the school under seven
     years of age, except such as are on the foundation, nor any
     to be admitted to receive maintenance from the funds who
     are above eighteen years. Each scholar to remain in school,
     if practicable, at least two years, but no scholar to
     receive pecuniary support beyond the period of seven years,
     nor above the age of twenty, unless for the pursuit of some
     study approved by the managers.

     “7. All the scholars are required to attend regularly every
     day, to abstain from all improper language in school, and
     to maintain a respectable moral character in society;
     without which no scholar can be admitted, or if admitted,
     be retained on his ill conduct being discovered.

     “8. The school to be open to all visitors every Tuesday,
     and all contributors to the funds to be admitted to inspect
     the accounts on the second Tuesday in every month.

     “It being intended to form a library and museum also
     connected with the school, as soon as practicable, any
     donation of natural curiosities, or of books, in English,
     or in any of the languages of India, (especially grammars,
     dictionaries, and books of history) will be thankfully
     received; and a book will be kept in which the names of
     donors will be recorded, with the nature and extent of the
     donation.”

                                  “Benares, 11th November, 1818.”

At the time the foregoing statement was put into circulation, there
were no less than one hundred and sixteen scholars in the school; but
it had already become apparent that the monthly sum granted by the
founder, was by no means sufficient to meet the necessary expenses of
the establishment. Joy Narain therefore, made a formal application to
the Governor-General in council for pecuniary assistance, when Lord
Hastings, with the ready attention which he always manifested for
the moral improvement of India, ordered a regular monthly allowance
to be contributed from the funds of government toward the efficient
maintenance of the school.

But the residence of Mr. Corrie at Benares was now drawing to a
close. He received about this time, an appointment to the vacant
Chaplaincy at Cawnpore; but before he could proceed to that station,
a vacancy had occurred at the Presidency by the departure of the
senior chaplain on sick-leave. This event was the occasion of Mr.
Corrie’s recall to Calcutta. He accordingly left Benares in December
1818, amid the regrets of a large body of respectable natives, who
had seen so much reason for regarding him as the friend and promoter
of every institution which was calculated to promote their welfare.
It could not, therefore, but be a matter of gratification to him, to
be followed to Calcutta by the subjoined Address written in English,
Persian, Hindoostanee, and Bengalee:--


                   FROM THE INHABITANTS OF BENARES,

                        TO THE REV. D. CORRIE.

     “For several years past we have entertained a desire,
     that no one would indulge in any kind of controversy, and
     that all theological discussion might cease amongst us.
     For the attainment of this our desire, Joy Narain Maharaj,
     often attempted to establish a school, but was never able
     to accomplish his design. When you arrived at Benares,
     and kindly engaged the superintendence of a school, in
     the which instruction should be afforded in the English,
     Persian, Hindue and Bengalee languages, from that time
     our wishes began to be realized: seeing that as at all
     times it is a difficult thing to collect individuals of
     different religious principles, you by your investigation,
     liberality and kindness, &c. caused upwards of 200 to lay
     aside their religious prejudices and engage in the same
     pursuit. Since when, by the will of God, you were pleased
     to embark for Calcutta, your condescension, liberality,
     and charity; your kindness, love for the truth, and enmity
     to deception; your excellent understanding, convincing
     knowledge, and acquaintance with the theological works
     of the Christian religion; your Christian-like conduct,
     your affording instruction to those desirous of being more
     acquainted with the way of salvation by the mediation of
     Christ, and meeting the views of the learner; are subjects
     of daily conversation, and cause us to admire that prudence
     which, aloof from the violence made use of by those of
     other dynasties, causes Rajahs, Baboos, great and learned
     Pundits, Mouluwees, Moonshees, in fact the great of the
     city, to court your friendship. A remembrance of these
     things occasions much sorrow, and produces a desire for
     another interview. Here we trust that God Almighty will
     again suffer us to meet, and that as long as it please Him
     to retain you in Calcutta, He will not fail on your account
     to bless both us and the school.”

     (Here follow the signatures of Joy Narain and of 266 other
     natives of Benares.)


       [95] Formed in 1815.

       [96] Instituted May 1817.

       [97] Originated by natives in Aug. 1816.

       [98] Established in 1789.

       [99] See Missionary Register for 1818, p. 448.

      [100] A kind of footman.

      [101] Mr. Adlington had gone to Agra to visit Abdool
            Messeeh.

      [102] The Calcutta Committee of the Church Missionary
            Society.

      [103] By the termination of the Pindarry and Mahratta wars.

      [104] That of Godfather.

      [105] See above p. 149.

      [106] Joy Narain’s own account of the circumstances which
            led him thus to consult the good of his countrymen,
            may be seen in the Missionary Register for 1819, pp.
            416, 417.

      [107] A fuller account of the baptism of these persons is
            given in the Missionary Register for 1820, p. 123.

      [108] The magistrate of the district.




                            CHAPTER XIV.

                         REMOVAL TO CALCUTTA.


It was not without regret that Mr. Corrie quitted a place which he
had found (to use his own words,) “a scene of delightful labour.” In
anticipation of his probable removal from Benares, he had written
some time before


                       TO THE REV. MR. SIMEON.

     “I am at a loss to decide how to act should my removal
     be determined on by Government. You will see a report
     of our Church Missionary proceedings here, no doubt, by
     Mr. Thomason. There is a great deal too much said in it
     about me, especially should I be removed soon, so as to be
     prevented establishing the plans in agitation. But I pray I
     may be able to go on in simplicity of mind, in obedience to
     the will of God’s providence, and seek nothing for myself;
     who am indeed nothing, and deserve to be the ‘off-scouring
     of all.’ If I were professedly a Missionary, and had
     the same prospect of entrance into this very citadel of
     Idolatry, I should consider it a call to live and die in
     this place; but as a Chaplain of the Government, am I not
     to consider the disposal of Government, as the voice of
     providence to me? I can truly say that, in the prospect of
     leaving this place, ‘I am oppressed; O Lord, undertake for
     me!’”

Before proceeding, however, to Calcutta, Mr. C. visited Chunar, and
there administered the Lord’s Supper to sixty communicants, of whom
half were native Christians. He drew up a plan, also, for the future
guidance of those who were engaged in the mission at that place and
Benares, with a view to secure regularity and efficiency to their
exertions: and in this he so arranged as to secure the cooperation
of all the parties, for whose guidance his directions were intended.
It may be mentioned, too, in connexion with the mission at Chunar,
that Mr. C. had employed himself, during his residence at Benares,
in carefully examining and correcting a revision of Mr. Martyn’s
Hindoostanee translation of the New Testament, into Hindoowee, which
Mr. Bowley had found it necessary to undertake for the sake of the
native population, among whom he laboured; and which was afterwards
printed by the Bible Society. At the close of the year 1818, Mr.
Corrie commenced his journey to Calcutta. On the way thither he
touched at Buxar, a place to which he had frequently paid missionary
visits; and where a great desire had often been manifested on
the part of the Christian inhabitants, to have a schoolmaster or
Missionary located among them. As a proof of the anxiety which these
Christians still cherished for the advantages of a stated ministry,
there was now placed in Mr. Corrie’s hands a list of about seventy
persons, (chiefly of the less wealthy class,) who were willing to
contribute certain monthly payments toward building a church, and the
maintenance of a Missionary.

On reaching Calcutta, among the first objects of Mr. Corrie’s care
was, the placing under proper instruction some Hindoostanee youths,
who had accompanied him from Benares. He had for some time been in
the habit of devoting much attention to their education, with a view
to their future usefulness as teachers; and he now placed them in a
school for Hindoostanee boys, which the Calcutta Committee of the
Church Missionary Society had just established in that city. With
reference to the importance of such an Institution, Mr. Corrie had
long entertained a decided opinion. In a letter, anterior to this
period, he had observed to Mr. Sherer,

     “I see so strongly, and experience also in my connection
     with the adult converts, the improbability of finding
     steady, judicious pastors, except from among those who
     have been educated in Christian studies, that I should
     like to devote the rest of my days to the instruction of
     native youths, with a view to the ministry. That may be
     better done in Calcutta than elsewhere, from the greater
     readiness with which books may be had, and especially
     help for the instruction of others got ready. Besides,
     future Missionaries will act with greater effect, aided by
     well-educated native brethren. So that in every point of
     view this appears to be a prime object, to educate for the
     ministry.”

As respected himself, it is scarcely necessary to state that the
scene of labour at the Presidency was, in most respects, widely
different from that to which Mr. Corrie had been accustomed in the
provinces. In a letter to his brother, dated early in 1819, Mr. C.
relates, as a specimen of his engagements,--

     “Mr. Parson and myself go on happily in our joint
     Chaplaincy. The Bishop is absent at Madras, where, we
     hear, he is confirming, in his sermons, all Mr. Thompson’s
     labours. He is in many respects a valuable man.

     “I have lately been appointed Honorary Chaplain to the
     [Military] Orphan Institution,[109] where I officiate every
     Sunday Morning soon after six o’clock. At the Cathedral
     I read prayers or preach at nine; and the same at eight
     in the evening. I take the weekly occasional duties in
     turn. I am, also, _ex officio_, a Governor of the Free
     School, and a member of the Select Vestry; who are Trustees
     of charities distributed to the monthly amount of 3,411
     rupees, among 568 Pensioners.”

The connexion with the “Select Vestry” here mentioned, did not
however prove without its difficulties; for it happened that Mr.
Corrie commenced his duties at the Presidency before a dispute had
subsided, respecting the mode in which that Vestry was constituted,
and the authority which they claimed to exercise. It seems to
have been the custom for the members of the Vestry to re-elect
themselves annually, so as to admit new members into their body only
as vacancies occurred by deaths, resignations, or departures for
England. They had customarily, also, appointed the officers connected
with the Church, now called the Cathedral. But it appears that at
the Easter preceding Mr. Corrie’s connection with the Cathedral,
a certain number of persons opposed the re-election of the Select
Vestry, as being contrary to the practice usual in England; and the
senior Chaplain, at the same time, claimed the right to nominate
the churchwardens. The Select Vestry, on the other hand, regarded
themselves (and had long been so recognized by government) as
special Trustees for a Church which had been originally built by
private individuals; and for the due distribution of certain funds,
arising mainly from legacies left for charitable purposes, and
under the administration of the Vestry. However much, therefore, to
be deplored, might be the animosity and indecorous language, into
which some of the parties concerned in the dispute, seem to have
been betrayed, it cannot be a matter of surprise that the Vestry,
as a body, should hesitate to abandon long-acknowledged claims,
and to hand over to other persons, the distribution of certain
charities which they conceived to be legally entrusted to the Vestry.
To such a length, however, had the dispute respecting this matter
been carried, that both parties complained to the Governor General
in Council; and the Government had given it as an opinion, rather
than as a decision, that the vestry should remain in possession of
its accustomed functions, until the authorities in England might
judge it proper to interfere. But notwithstanding this opinion on
the part of Government, the opponents of the Vestry revived the
dispute, at the Easter of 1819. Much correspondence seems to have
taken place on the subject, and many hard words again to have been
used; and Mr. Corrie as one, among others, who considered it their
duty to maintain themselves in the position which had been thus
sanctioned by Government, became, as a matter of course, the subject
of reprehension on the part of those, who opposed the claims of the
Vestry. Yet it is stated by those who were in Calcutta at the time,
and were also well acquainted with the facts of the case, that the
subject of these Memoirs was enabled so far to keep apart from the
bitterness of this strife, as to exhibit throughout “the prudence and
meekness becoming the minister of Christ.”

With the exception, however, of passing occurrences such as these,
there was but little diversity in the duties which now fell to Mr.
Corrie’s lot, beyond what may be found in the life of a parochial
clergyman. The history of any one day was, to a great extent
therefore, the history of the succeeding month; and so on, from
month to month: for as it was not yet certain, whether the senior
Chaplain, who had gone to the Cape, would return to India or not, Mr.
Corrie could not regard himself as more than a temporary resident at
the Presidency, and did not therefore feel at liberty to engage so
actively in the concerns of several religious societies in Calcutta,
as he afterwards felt called upon to do. But when intelligence
reached India, early in 1820, that the senior Chaplain had proceeded
to England, and Mr. C. thus became entitled to succeed to the vacant
chaplaincy, he began to lay himself out for some steady course of
missionary labour in Calcutta and the neighbourhood. One of his first
movements was, to endeavour to collect a native congregation in
Calcutta, by means of Mr. Bowley, who had come down from Chunar to
superintend the printing of that revised Hindoowee translation of the
New Testament, which has been already mentioned.[110] The ulterior
object Mr. Corrie had in view in this was, to provide a sphere of
labour for Abdool Messeeh, who was expected to reach Calcutta in the
spring of 1820, and whose state of health might probably render it
desirable that he should remain there for the future. Mr. Corrie was,
also, desirous to excite a deeper interest for missionary objects,
among the poorer classes about the Presidency, in the belief that
less attention had hitherto been given to effect this, than, on
every christian principle, seemed necessary. As having now, also,
undertaken the office of Secretary to the Church Missionary Society
in Calcutta, Mr. C. was in better circumstances to direct these
missionary plans. Some account of his occupations, is given in a
letter to his sister, who had returned to England:--

                                                   “May 19, 1820.

     “Abdool Messeeh is here: I am daily at work with him,
     writing a Commentary in Hindoostanee, from six in the
     morning till breakfast and after, if I am not called away.
     We have got him a house in _Meer-jan-kee-gully_. It is a
     roomy (upper-roomed) house, but out of repair; so we get
     it for fifty rupees a month; and here he collects the poor
     four times a week. The Church Missionary concerns occupy
     me too a good deal; and we are setting up a printing-press
     in my go-downs.[111] To-day the first sheet of a tract is
     printing off, as a beginning.”

Soon after the date of the foregoing extract, Mr. Corrie had an
examination of the boys of his Hindoostanee-school, in the presence
of the members of the Calcutta Committee of the Church Missionary
Society, and of such other persons as interested themselves about
missionary objects. His many avocations did not admit of his
undertaking the superintendence of a larger number of scholars than
that with which the school had commenced; but the result of the
examination proved, that the benefit derived from being habituated
to christian example and the progress which the boys had made in
a knowledge of the Hindoostanee New Testament, the Hindoostanee
Catechism, and the principles of the Christian religion in general,
were of a very encouraging nature. Impressed, therefore, with the
conviction that a Christian education was of the greatest importance
as a means to render the natives themselves efficient instruments of
God to their countrymen, Mr. Corrie welcomed the idea of establishing
a missionary College by the Bishop. With reference to that
circumstance, he wrote to his brother:--

     “I am quite sure that all men will rejoice in the
     establishment of the College; although learning alone will
     do but little. It therefore appears to me more than ever
     necessary to maintain strenuously the labours and plans
     of the Church Missionary Society. Under these feelings
     I was led last Thursday into a long conversation with
     the Bishop, respecting Missionary proceedings, in which
     the Church Missionary Society and its views were brought
     forward and discussed. The Bishop’s chief objection was,
     that the sending out of English clergymen as Missionaries,
     would prevent the East India Company from making such a
     provision of Chaplains, as they ought to make. As far as it
     goes, the argument is just; but I think he ought rather to
     adopt such Missionaries, and by pointing out to Government
     the benefits produced by them, to draw forth Government
     support, which otherwise may not be afforded in any way.”

It may not be amiss to mention, that however much Mr. Corrie might
be occupied by matters of public interest, he did not neglect the
charities of social life. On the contrary, he did not allow his gate
to be closed against any who might have a reason for desiring to
hold communication with him. And, as in India, persons arriving from
England, or visiting the Presidency were, at that time, regarded as
having an almost unlimited claim on the hospitality of the residents
in Calcutta, Mr. C. was seldom without his share of such guests. This
circumstance, added to his natural kind-heartedness, gave occasion to
one, who loved him, and who was then under his roof, to remark, ‘as
long as he lives and wherever he lives, he will have as many people
about him as fall in his way; until every corner be occupied, and he
himself is left without a corner.’ To many of the younger portion of
these visitors Mr. C. was, also, oftentimes the instrument of great
moral good; and in such cases it was his custom, as occasion served
or might require, to address to them a letter of encouragement or
direction, after they had left him. An extract from a letter to Capt.
Moyle Sherer, H. M. 34th regiment, and who had been on a visit to
his brother in Calcutta, may serve to illustrate the spirit of such
communications:--

                                         “Calcutta, May 27, 1820.

     “You are by this time settled with your regiment, and begin
     to find exactly how the minds of those around you stand
     affected to the principles of true religion. Some painful
     discoveries will probably have been made, and on the other
     hand, perhaps, consolation will have arisen from unexpected
     sources. Such is the beginning, especially of a life of
     piety. We are apt to wonder that what we see so clearly to
     be rational and necessary, is not equally seen by others
     when brought before them; and the result is, to make us
     feel more experimentally that what we have learned on these
     subjects, has not been from man’s teaching, but that God
     has been leading us by ways that we knew not. The discovery
     of our own inbred sin is what is most distressing at this
     stage. Indeed, to the end of life such ebullitions of the
     sin that dwelleth in us, occasionally take place, as almost
     confound the Christian, and send him back to his first
     principles; and it seems as if the whole work of religion
     were yet to begin. Yea, how often does this inward enemy
     impel him to the very brink of disgrace, and he escapes
     as by miracle, from temporal no less than eternal ruin.
     Such is my experience up to this day; and now, what with
     the experience upwards of forty years have supplied of the
     world’s insufficiency to afford happiness, and of the power
     of sin, unless God prevent, to work temporal and eternal
     ruin, the grave begins to appear a refuge, and I have a
     deep conviction that they only are completely blessed who
     are in heaven. I think you were quite right in not taking
     part with the Wesleyans till you know more of them. By
     degrees the truly sincere will draw to you as their natural
     superior, and you will be able to direct their reading and
     to regulate their affairs far more to their advantage than
     they can do themselves.”

During the October of 1820, Mr. Corrie was afflicted by the death of
one of the elder of the Hindoostanee boys, who were in the school
under his care. The youth in question was a Hindoo by birth, and when
a child had been purchased up the country, from his parents, during a
season of scarcity. He had therefore been under Christian instruction
the greater part of his life. It seems that he died of consumption,
and that during a long illness, he had afforded satisfactory evidence
that he had not received a Christian education in vain. The death of
this youth was not long afterwards followed by the removal of the
remaining youths, to assist in the schools at different missionary
stations. Before, however, Mr. Corrie’s Hindoostanee scholars had
been thus dispersed, there had been admitted among them, for the
purpose of receiving instruction in order to baptism, a Hindoo youth
who had been servant to a converted Moonshee.[112] This youth,
when full of the idea of making the pilgrimage to Juggernauth, had
accidentally fallen in with the Moonshee, and accompanied him as far
as Benares. In consequence, however, of the conversations, which
he held with the Moonshee on the subject of religion, his faith in
the efficacy of a pilgrimage to Juggernauth had entirely abated, by
the time they reached Benares: and he accordingly returned back
to Delhi with the Moonshee, in the capacity of servant; although
he left his master, after a while, to avoid the scoffs of his
Hindoo acquaintances. He could not, however, rid himself of the
conviction that his master was right, and became so uneasy under that
conviction, that he quitted his home in search of peace of mind.
Eventually he made his way to Calcutta, and became an inmate of the
Hindoostanee school there, and in due time was baptised.

It may here not be uninteresting to relate, that after Mr. Corrie
became Secretary to the Calcutta Committee of the Church Missionary
Society, he was in the habit of employing himself as he found
opportunity, in contributing to the pages of a ‘Quarterly Circular,’
which first appeared in 1820, and contained from time to time, a
summary of ‘Missionary Intelligence,’ for the use of Missionaries and
others, at the different stations in India. Among his contributions
to this periodical may be mentioned a series of papers, containing
a ‘Sketch of the progress of Christianity in Calcutta and in the
provinces of the presidency of Bengal.’ Mr. Corrie had often been
struck by observing the importance attached by historians to but
imperfect records of former ages, provided those records happened
to bear the marks of authenticity; and he conceived, therefore,
that some future historian of the church of Christ in India,
might possibly derive assistance from a notice of such facts and
circumstances as that ‘Sketch’ might be the means of rescuing from
oblivion. It may with truth be added, that no person then living was
better qualified than Mr. C. to record the more recent occurrences
connected with the history of Christianity in Bengal, he having
himself been not only a careful observer of all that concerned the
progress of true religion in that Presidency, but also the personal
friend of those men of God, who had immediately preceded him, and to
whose zeal and labours may be traced the first origin of almost every
religious institution in Bengal. The Calcutta Diocesan Committee of
the Society for promoting Christian knowledge, having now, also,
directed their attention to the translation of religious Tracts into
the languages of India, a translation into Hindoostanee, both in
the Nagree and Nustaliq character, of “Sellon’s Abridgment of the
Holy Scriptures,” was assigned to the superintendence and revision
of Mr. Corrie. Having been requested, moreover, by the Committee of
the Calcutta Bible Society, to state for their information, such
particulars illustrative of the benefit attending the circulation of
the Holy Scriptures, as might have fallen under his own observation,
the following was his reply:--

                                        “Calcutta, 6th Feb. 1821.

     “In compliance with your request that I would state any
     circumstances within my own knowledge, tending to shew
     the good arising from the distribution of the Scriptures
     alone, I have endeavoured to call to mind some facts in
     corroboration of my general feeling of the good arising
     from the measure in question. The benefit arising to
     professed Christians is not, I believe, within your
     contemplation, otherwise I might say much respecting the
     benefit the native Christians on this side of India have
     derived from the Bible Society. During the prevalence
     of the Mahratta power, many Christians were employed
     in offices of trust by the Native princes, chiefly in
     situations connected with the army.

     “I had, whilst residing at Agra, frequent applications from
     Christians of that class, and many of them sent from far,
     for copies of the Persian and Hindoostanee translations: to
     shew the need they stood in of such supplies, I may just
     observe, that a Christian of the class referred to, in the
     service of the Burthpore Rajah, on applying personally to
     me for a copy of the New Testament, was asked if he had
     ever perused the Gospel in any language? he answered that
     he had never even seen the Book; and in the figurative
     language of the country, added, that ‘he knew not whether
     the Book was made of wood or paper.’

     “Among the most remarkable instances of Mahomedans and
     Hindoos deriving benefit from the Scriptures alone, the
     following occur to me:

     “In 1813, a Mahomedan Hukeem came to me at Agra from
     Burthpore, saying, that he had many years before read the
     Pentateuch in Arabic, a copy of which had been given to him
     by a Roman Catholic priest: that about two years before the
     time he came to me, he had obtained a copy of St. Matthew’s
     gospel in Persian, from reading of which he had become
     convinced of the divinity of Jesus Christ. This man, with
     his son, was afterwards baptized.

     “The next instance that occurs to me, is of an aged Hindoo:
     this man from reading the writings of Cuber, had been
     led to renounce Idolatry, and finding the Law and Gospel
     spoken of by Cuber, as divine books, he was for several
     years anxious to possess a copy. After several ineffectual
     attempts to procure a copy from English gentlemen, he at
     length obtained the Gospels in the Nagree character. He was
     also afterwards baptized. A third instance of good derived
     from the Scriptures alone, was Burukut Museeh in 1813; he
     got a manuscript copy of Job, which he perused with great
     interest; afterwards he got a copy of the Psalms; then
     Isaiah; and finally the New Testament in Hindoostanee.
     His exemplary life and happy death are recorded in the
     Missionary Register.

     “The only other case that occurs to me, is that of Fuez
     Musseeh, baptized in 1817. At seventeen years of age, he
     became a Mahomedan purely from the abhorrence of idolatry
     expressed in the Koran; he remained upwards of twenty
     years a strict and indefatigable disciple of the Koran,
     living as a Fakeer and obtaining great honour among his
     countrymen for his supposed sanctity. At length, being
     disgusted in his own mind with the practices recommended by
     his spiritual guides, and wearied with his own ineffectual
     labours after holiness, he abandoned all his honours as
     a Religieux, and bought from a lady a copy of the New
     Testament, if haply he might find in it that rest for his
     soul he had hitherto sought in vain from other quarters.
     He sought, and found, as his conduct hitherto leads us to
     think, the object of his pursuit.

     “I have met whilst residing out of Calcutta, with very many
     natives, who from reading the Scriptures, have had all
     prejudice against Christianity removed; and some of them,
     as Joy Narain Ghossaul, at Benares, have been set upon many
     works of benevolence and charity, from their knowledge
     of duty as learned from the Bible, though they have not
     derived _all_ the benefits to be desired from the copies
     of the Scriptures circulated among them. How far this
     partial good is to be appreciated, each Christian will form
     his own judgment. As a preparing of the way of the Lord, it
     is by no means to be undervalued, and future labourers will
     reap the fruit of the precious seed which the Bible Society
     has been sowing in India with so much diligence for several
     years past.”

The memoranda which occur in Mr. Corrie’s Journal after his return to
India, are very few, but under date of June 11, 1821, he remarks:--

     “I have been endeavouring to call my ways to remembrance,
     and find enough to be humbled for in the review, but a
     difficulty as to how I should speak of it. This difficulty
     I wish to account for. Formerly I could write of my state
     with ease; lately I have neglected to make memoranda.
     I have certainly been much employed in public matters.
     My duties as Chaplain, and as Secretary to the Church
     Missionary Society,--the schools, the press, leave me very
     little time, and that little I find difficult to apply to a
     good purpose. My want of retirement prevents the right use
     of the little I might have. I am deeply conscious that the
     evil propensities of my nature are by no means eradicated;
     and I ought to be alarmed that they do not more alarm me.
     I feel daily that I sin, and resolve daily against my
     propensities, yet daily am more or less overcome. Oh! I
     desire to awake to righteousness! I desire to be alarmed;
     to be saved from sin, and quickened and made alive to God.
     O Spirit of light and love, of power and of a sound mind,
     work in me to will and do of thy good pleasure! I see, in
     reading the epistle to Titus, that except in such points as
     are agreeable to my nature, I am far from the character of
     a true minister of Christ.”

There is reason, however, to hope that Mr. Corrie’s ministrations in
Calcutta were not altogether in vain. At any rate, it is well known
that his labours were unceasing, whether regard be had to his duties
as chaplain, or those connected with the Church Missionary Society,
and the superintendence of the native schools. In the December too,
of this year, he was appointed to preach the sermon at the third
visitation of Bishop Middleton; and in the same month printed, among
the Quarterly Missionary Intelligence, a biographical sketch of his
old friend Joy Narain, who had died at Benares in November.

But that which now more especially occupied the attention of Mr.
C. and others, engaged in conducting the affairs of the Church
Missionary Society in Calcutta, was the education of the native
females of India. The state of society had until lately, seemed
hopelessly to exclude the native female from all share in the
benefits of education; but the success which had attended a school
set on foot by the Baptist mission, had induced some friends of
religion in India, to communicate with the British and Foreign
School-Society in England, with a view to extend the means of
instruction to the females of India, as widely as practicable. Funds
were in consequence, raised for that purpose; and Miss Cooke, a lady
of education and piety, arrived in Calcutta during Nov. 1821, for the
purpose of devoting herself to the work.

It was early in January 1822, that the Calcutta Committee of the
Church Missionary Society, took measures for the formation of female
schools, under the superintendence of this lady; and such was the
success attending their first efforts, that three schools were in
operation by the middle of February. It was then thought desirable
to bring the subject more distinctly before the residents in
Calcutta, in the hope that the friends to the moral and intellectual
improvement of the natives of India, might be induced to assist
in carrying on this important and difficult undertaking: and to
Mr. Corrie it was assigned, to draw up and circulate the following
address:


                      “NATIVE FEMALE EDUCATION.

     “The importance of education, in order to the improvement
     of the state of society among the natives of this country,
     is now generally acknowledged, and the eagerness of the
     natives themselves for instruction begins to exceed the
     opportunities hitherto afforded them.

     “But to render education effectual to the improvement of
     society, it must obviously, be extended to both sexes. Man
     requires a ‘Help-meet;’ and in every country the infant
     mind receives its earliest impressions from the female
     sex. Wherever, therefore, this sex is left in a state of
     ignorance and degradation, the endearing and important
     duties of wife and mother cannot be duly discharged; and no
     great progress in general civilization and morals can, in
     such a state of things, be reasonably hoped for.

     “Such however, with few exceptions has hitherto been the
     state of the female sex in this country; but a happy
     change in this respect seems at length to be gradually
     taking place. A most pleasing proof of this occurred in
     the interesting fact, that thirty-five girls were among
     the number of scholars, at the last examination of the
     School Society, in the house of one of the most respectable
     natives in Calcutta.

     “The arrival of a lady of judgment and experience, at such
     a crisis, for the purpose of devoting her time and talents
     to the work of native female education, could not but be
     regarded, by all interested in the improvement of society
     among the natives of this country, as a most favourable
     event.

     “This lady (Miss Cooke) was recommended, in the first
     instance, by the British and Foreign School Society, to the
     Calcutta School Society; but the Committee of this Society,
     being composed partly of native gentlemen, were not
     prepared unanimously and actively to engage in any general
     plan of native female education. Most of these, however,
     have expressed their good-will towards such a plan, and
     their intention of availing themselves, as circumstances
     may admit, of Miss Cooke’s disinterested services to obtain
     instruction for their families.

     “Under these circumstances the corresponding Committee of
     the Church Missionary Society have cordially undertaken
     to promote, as they may be enabled, the objects of Miss
     Cooke’s mission.

     “Miss Cooke will, as she may find opportunity, afford
     instruction at home to the female children of the higher
     classes of natives; and at the suggestion of an enlightened
     native gentleman, a separate school will be attempted,
     for poor female children of high caste, with a view to
     their becoming hereafter teachers in the families of their
     wealthy country-women.

     “Miss Cooke has already made sufficient progress in the
     acquirement of Bengalee, to enable her to superintend the
     establishment of schools; and having been attended in her
     first attempt by a female friend, who can converse in
     Bengalee, some interesting conversations took place with
     the mothers of the children first collected, in which Miss
     Cooke’s motives were fully explained to them. Soon after,
     a petition was presented to Miss Cooke, in consequence
     of which, a second female school has been established
     in another quarter of the town, and a third school has
     been formed in Mirzapore, near the Church Mission-House.
     Thus three schools are already established under Miss
     Cooke’s immediate care, containing about sixty girls; and
     the disposition manifested towards these schools by the
     natives, affords reason to expect that a wish to have
     female schools will in time become general.

     “It is intended therefore, to erect in a suitable situation
     in the native town, a school-room, with a dwelling-house
     attached, in which an extensive system of female education
     may be attempted; and this plan, so peculiarly within their
     province, is submitted, with much respect and confidence
     of success, to the sympathy and patronage of the ladies
     of this Presidency, by the corresponding Committee of the
     Church Missionary Society. Whatever assistance may be
     afforded, either as donations or monthly subscriptions,
     will be exclusively applied to the purposes of female
     education, and a report of progress will be submitted,
     from time to time by Miss Cooke, for the information of
     subscribers.”

                                     “_Calcutta, Feb. 23, 1822._”

The result of this appeal was, that within a few weeks not less
than 3,000 rupees were subscribed for the furtherance of the object
contemplated; the Governor General, Lady Hastings, and others of the
first distinction being among the most liberal of the contributors.
Nor was it among the least remarkable circumstance connected with
this great social movement, that a highly respectable Brahmin wrote
and circulated a tract, for the express purpose of recommending to
his countrymen the importance of female education. He urged it also,
as the duty of every parent to rescue thus their female offspring
from that state of degradation, to which (as he proved from history)
the women in Hindoostan were not formerly subject.

With reference to these and similar occurrences, Mr. Corrie writes to
his brother.

                                       “Calcutta, April 19, 1822.

     “Our missionary engagements are becoming more and more
     important; and opportunities for extending our plans more
     and more frequent and easy: But with all these [prospects,]
     a spirit unfriendly to the gospel is gone forth amongst the
     natives, and they are commencing Deistical politicians.
     Four native newspapers have started in Calcutta; two in
     Bengalee, one in Hindoostanee, and one in Persian. They
     cannot all stand long, but they mark the spirit of the
     times. They are all under an influence unfriendly to our
     Church establishment: but we are getting on with our
     schools, having now upwards of four hundred boys, and one
     hundred and thirty-four girls, under our Church Missionary
     Society, within the boundary of Calcutta; while the
     Diocesan Committee have several schools in the suburbs.
     The youth in these [schools] will, we hope, grow up with
     impressions favourable to our views of things.”

On Wednesday, May 26, 1822, Mr. Corrie preached a sermon at the
Old Church, in aid of the Society for Missions to Africa and the
East. The sermon was afterwards printed with the fifth report of
the Calcutta Committee of that Society, and contains some valuable
remarks on the advantages connected with direct instruction in
the faith of Christ, over the education which merely imparts such
knowledge as has reference only to the affairs of this life. One
sentence may here be cited as illustrative of the great change which
the mind of India had undergone, since the time when Mr. Corrie
could labour for the conversion of the heathen, only at the risk of
incurring the censure of government:--

     “Our Church, with reason we think, calls herself
     Apostolical: now, what is this but missionary? And a
     portion of missionary spirit has always resided among her
     members. Time has been, indeed, when this was regarded by
     many rather as a mark of dissent; but now, blessed be God,
     she seems to be rising, through all her ranks, to her high
     and proper character as a missionary body.”

About six weeks only had passed since the delivery of this discourse,
when Mr. Corrie was summoned to attend the death-bed of the Bishop of
Calcutta, who was called to his rest after but a few days’ illness.
Considering the peculiar circumstances of India, and the then novelty
of episcopal rule in that country, it could scarcely be expected that
Mr. Corrie, among others, should be able to recognise the wisdom
of every act of Bishop Middleton’s administration, and the equity
of the control which that able prelate claimed to exercise over
the temporal as well as spiritual affairs of the chaplains to the
East India Company; but his correspondence abundantly shows that
he could well appreciate the Bishop’s character. With regard more
especially to the cause nearest his heart--that of missions, Mr. C.
considered it to have derived from the deceased prelate, exactly that
kind of sanction which was then required; it wanted only official
countenance, and the reputation of orthodoxy. To labour for the moral
improvement and conversion of our heathen fellow-subjects, used to be
regarded as characterising a party in the church, and as proceeding
from a kind of fanaticism that would endanger the stability of
our oriental empire. But the interest which Bishop Middleton had
taken in the Missionary cause, had given reason to believe, that
official dignity combined with a high reputation for sound judgment
and secular learning, were not incompatible with the conviction,
that our rule in India had every thing to hope from the spread of
Christianity; and that it was not fanatical to suppose, that so vast
an empire had been committed to our governance for the noble purpose
of making known the Son of God, to a people who were ignorant of Him.

Within two months of the death of Bishop Middleton, the Archdeacon
of Calcutta fell a victim to the Cholera; and as that circumstance
rendered it necessary for the Government to delegate the
administration of the affairs of the See to other hands, Mr. Corrie
and Mr. Parson were commissioned to exercise such jurisdiction as by
law might be warranted, until a successor to Bishop Middleton should
arrive from England.

In a memorandum, penned about that time, Mr. Corrie writes:--

     “Sep. 28th, 1822. This day sixteen years ago I first landed
     in Calcutta. How altered the state of society! Then Mr.
     Brown was senior Chaplain. He had at time dear Martyn in
     his house, and received Parson and myself into his family.
     Now he and his wife are numbered with the dead, and all
     their children returned.... How many other changes, also,
     in the state of the religious society of Calcutta, so that
     Mr. U. only remains of the friends of religion in his class
     of society of that day. How varied has been the scene of my
     own Indian-life!

     “In respect of public affairs, great changes, also, have
     taken place. In ecclesiastical matters great changes. A
     bishop and archdeacon appointed in 1814, and Bishop’s
     college has been the result. The subject of missions
     has thus, by degrees, become one of acknowledged duty
     and advantage to society. The bishop hurried off by
     sudden death: the archdeacon taken off not two months
     after, more suddenly still: Parson and I appointed to
     exercise their functions _pro tempore_. I would, however,
     remark especially the state of my own mind during this
     long period. I came to India chiefly with a view to the
     propagation of the gospel; and that view, I trust I
     can say, has not been lost sight of. My time has been
     principally devoted to that object. My money, too, has
     chiefly gone in that cause. I trust a mission has been
     established at Chunar, Agra, and Benares, through my
     humble means, which will go on, and ‘increase with the
     increase of God.’ In Calcutta, the labours of Secretary
     to the Church Missionary Society, in addition to my own
     official duties, have helped to bring on the loss of
     strength I am now suffering under. But I would be aware
     that the state of heart is chiefly to be attended to. And
     here I can see no one duty so performed, that I dare think
     of it in the view of presenting it to God; and were it not
     that Jesus is the righteousness and strength of all who
     believe, I could not entertain the slightest hope.

     “For about three months, my ancles have swollen
     occasionally, with bad digestion, and aching of the limbs
     and legs. The doctor says it is the effect of climate; by
     which I understand that my frame is debilitated sensibly,
     by the heat. He says, rest is the only remedy, and I am
     come to Pultah Ghaut[113] for rest, and retirement. My
     prayer to God is that I may be made fully alive to my real
     state, and may not waste away without feeling the tendency
     of such a wasting. I desire to have my loins girt about and
     my lamp supplied with oil; so that, whenever the bridegroom
     is announced, I may be ready to enter in.

     “I desire to be more spiritually minded; and to have more
     of a realizing faith, as to the truths I am exercised
     about day by day out of the holy word. I would fain see
     religion on the increase among us; and have more abundant
     fruit of the word. Oh! that the Spirit were poured upon
     Europeans and natives! Oh! that the kingdom of Christ were
     established in my own heart! more settled in my family; my
     flock; and on all around generally. Oh! that the salvation
     were come out of Zion. Then should this nation be glad and
     rejoice; and He whose name is Jehovah, be acknowledged
     throughout the land. Amen.”

The debility of which Mr. Corrie here complains had so increased,
that the medical men decided that it would not be safe for him to
remain in Calcutta during the hot weather; and moreover, advised a
long sea-voyage as the best means for recruiting his impaired health.
He did not, however, think a voyage to be of so much consequence;
yet early in February 1823 he quitted Calcutta, accompanied by his
family and Captain Stephen of the Engineers, and went to reside on
the coast, near Juggernaut. For the first eight or nine weeks of his
residence at Pooree, Mr. Corrie’s health had been greatly restored;
but the anxiety and fatigue which he underwent in attending the
sick-bed of Captain Stephen, who died at Pooree on the 10th of May,
brought on a serious attack of fever. In this state he attended the
funeral of his deceased friend; but being too unwell to proceed
through the service, he was carried home in a state of the greatest
exhaustion. In the course of the day, however, Mr. Corrie revived
sufficiently to allow of his writing to Mr. Thomason, an account of
the last illness of Captain Stephen; after which the fever returned
with such violence that for several days the sufferer was scarcely
sensible. The following is his letter:--


                       TO THE REV. T. THOMASON.

                                           “Pooree, May 10, 1823.

     “The last sad offices having been performed for your
     beloved son-in-law, I will endeavour to recal some of
     the pleasing expressions which fell from his lips during
     the last week, both with a view to the comfort of his
     friends, and to indulge myself on a subject which engrosses
     all my thoughts. My acquaintance with the dear departed
     commenced in September 1814, when I saw him almost the
     whole of every day during about a week. Again in 1817
     and 1818, our intercourse was renewed both at Ghazeepoor
     and Benares. He was then, it is almost needless to say,
     strictly correct in his conversation and general conduct,
     but did not exhibit that serious impression of divine truth
     which latterly appeared in him. When we went on board the
     schooner, I soon discovered a marked difference in him
     in that respect. There was an evident love of religious
     exercises, and religious books; and I observed more than
     once a serious attention to private devotion. From that
     period our intercourse was unreserved, and his general
     conversation and remarks, such as belong to godliness.
     He joined us regularly in our morning and evening family
     worship. He frequently spoke of his expectation that his
     illness would end in death, but we hoped otherwise; and
     nothing particular, as to his views in the prospect of
     such an event was mentioned. He had never been free from
     bowel-complaint since we came together, and during the
     early part of the week commencing April 27, he complained
     of an increase to his disorder from having taken cold,
     though no such appearances as usually attend a cold
     appeared about him. He kept up as usual till Friday the 2nd
     of May, when he did not come to breakfast with the family,
     but came out to dinner.

     “On Saturday he did not leave his room. On Sunday I went
     into his room, and asked if I should join him in reading
     the word of God and prayer, since he no longer could join
     with us. To this he gladly assented, and began to speak
     of the great mercy of God towards him in preserving him
     from acute pain, whilst he felt himself sinking gradually.
     I read the first lesson for the day, and he made several
     remarks on the applicableness of the admonitions to the
     spiritual state of the Christian. Being drowsy, from the
     opiates administered to allay his disease, he desired me
     to defer praying till the afternoon. In the afternoon he
     was quite awake, spoke of the mercies of God toward him,
     complaining also of his want of gratitude to his God and
     Saviour. I spoke to him of what I thought of his state
     when at Ghazeepoor in 1814, and especially some remarks
     he then made on hymn singing, and expressed my delight at
     his now altered feeling, and the ground of encouragement
     it afforded him. He said that he had strong convictions of
     sin before that time; that he owed much to his deceased
     Aunt Stephen, who had tried much to impress his mind with
     a sense of religion; adding, ‘I know now why Christians
     take so much pleasure in hymn-singing; they love to dwell
     upon the ideas conveyed by the words.’ I may here observe
     that he several times, since we have been at Pooree,
     spoke of his Aunt Stephen, and of all his family, and the
     obligations he owed her.

     “To-day he also mentioned his wish to partake of the Lord’s
     Supper, before his intellects should become clouded.
     On Monday, May 5th, he asked me if I were prepared to
     administer to him the Lord’s Supper. As no time had
     been mentioned the day before, I proposed to put off
     the celebration till next day, when we would make it a
     family ordinance; to this he cheerfully assented. I do not
     recollect any particulars of what fell from him that day,
     but his conversation was always with reference to his dying
     soon, and filled with thanksgiving to his God and Saviour
     for the comparative ease in which he lay, and especially
     for the hope of heaven which he enjoyed; often exclaiming
     that it was all of mercy, and entirely flowing from the
     Saviour’s merits. On Tuesday May 6, his mind was confused
     all the morning from opiates; about two, P. M. seeing him
     collected, I asked if he would now have the Sacrament
     administered? He said he wished to be more awake and would
     postpone it till the morrow; adding, ‘I have committed my
     all into the hands of my blessed Saviour, and I can trust
     him to keep me sleeping or waking.’

     “On Wednesday he was taken up with some temporal matters,
     and wrote the letter which I forwarded to you on that day.
     Afterwards Mrs. Corrie and I went into his room, and we
     all, I trust, by faith fed on Christ in our hearts, with
     thanksgiving. Our sick brother was much alive during the
     whole of the service, and read the passages in which the
     congregation join, with much clearness and fervor. On going
     into his room about an hour after the service, he broke
     out, ‘Oh, may this dispensation be blessed to my dear
     Esther, that she may give herself wholly up to God, and
     fix all her love on him alone. She has a deep sense of her
     own unworthiness, and I bless God for the piety that is in
     her.’ On Thursday May 8th, there appeared no alteration in
     the state of his disease. Two surgeons from Cuttack having
     arrived, our own doctor brought them to see him. They went
     into the next room to communicate their thoughts on his
     case, when he heard them agree that nothing could be done
     for his relief. On my going into his room after they went
     away, he seized my hand with all his remaining strength,
     and said, ‘Oh my dear friend, how much am I indebted to
     God for placing me at this time with friends, who do all
     they can for my comfort, without concealing their concern
     that my soul should be prepared for death;’ adding much on
     the evil too many medical men are guilty of in cherishing
     hopes of life when their patients should rather be thinking
     of death, and contrasting the difference of his present
     circumstances with what they would have been had he gone,
     on leaving Calcutta, among strangers and irreligious
     persons; then adding praise and thanksgiving to God. On
     the early part of this afternoon Mrs. Corrie went into
     his room, when he presently began to speak to her as for
     the last time, praying that her husband might be spared
     to her, and her children, and to the church, adding many
     expressions of his regard and affection.

     “On Friday, May 9th. On my entering his room early, and
     enquiring after his state, he said, ‘I have had a wretched
     night, not in body, for I have been easy, but in mind. I
     have been thinking of this and that treatment which might
     have been used; but it is all wrong, and thus my wickedness
     brings its own punishment. I have much tried to repent of
     my daily wickedness, and of my wicked life.’ Adding a good
     deal on the subject of God’s ordering all our affairs, and
     the duty of looking above human agents--and said, ‘O never
     did weary traveller desire his home more than I desire my
     rest:’ most cordially acknowledging with me the duty of
     submission, and joining in prayer for an increase in faith
     and patience. Some favourable symptoms appeared, but he
     seemed to build nothing on them. For several days we had an
     European Sergeant to sit up at night. He has expressed his
     surprise at the constant patience our brother manifested,
     and told me, that he was much in prayer during Friday night.

     “On Saturday morning, about half past three, a violent
     discharge of blood took place, and again about five. I
     went into his room just after the latter, and found him
     prostrate indeed.

     “He began at once, ‘O my God, suffer me not to fall from
     thee: make my repentance sincere, and let my faith stand
     firm--O! accept me, unworthy! for the merits of Jesus
     Christ. I am wretched and miserable, let my soul be
     cleansed in his blood and presented spotless before thee;
     bless my dear wife and children, bless my dear father and
     mother, bless you (addressing himself to me,) and your
     family; and God make you a greater blessing than ever to
     the church, but don’t waste your life in this country,
     go home and do good among the poor. O God! bless all the
     doctors who have attended me, and let them not forget
     their own mortality amidst these scenes;’ adding prayers
     for such generally as he might at any time have had
     disagreement with. On my reminding him of our blessedness
     in having an advocate with the Father to render these
     petitions available, he added strong expressions of the
     mercy of God towards him, and of his earnest desire to be
     at rest with God; adding ‘O God, thou knowest that I love
     thee,’ and asked me if I thought it wrong to pray for his
     dismissal. He spoke of his temporal affairs as settled, and
     said he had no anxiety about his children, the Lord would
     provide for them. About 7, on going into his room, I spoke
     respecting the little probability when we first met that
     I should survive him: he began to pray for blessings for
     me, adding, ‘Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all
     his benefits; who forgiveth all thy sins, who healeth all
     thy diseases.’ Adding with emphasis, ‘_forget not all his
     benefits_; that he had been forgetful all his days, but the
     Lord had shewed him great mercy.’ From that time he spoke
     little. Being removed to another bed, he dosed much from
     medicine. About ten, observing him restless, I asked if he
     wanted anything? he said ‘No.’ If he retained his peace of
     mind? He said, ‘His mind had become very confused.’ And on
     reminding him of the ‘Advocate with the Father,’ he faintly
     added, ‘Bless God for all the way He has led me,’ or to
     that effect. About eleven, seeing him restless, and less
     of consciousness about him, I asked him if he knew me, he
     said, ‘Yes;’ and in answer to my question, ‘If I should
     pray for him?’ he said, ‘Yes;’ but there was no respond
     to the few petitions I offered up, and he was no longer
     sensible. At half-past one, another discharge of blood took
     place, which led us to think him expiring; but the spirit
     lingered till half-past two, when, we doubt not, he entered
     into his much-desired rest. I may tell you, though I mean
     to send a medical statement of the fact, that the three
     doctors ascertained after his death, that the liver was
     perfectly sound, but the colon had become ulcerated; and at
     length, a blood-vessel being eaten through, the discharge
     above-mentioned ensued, and brought on dissolution; but
     that this must have happened at no great distance of
     time, and that no change of climate or treatment, could
     have prevented the fatal result. This morning the beloved
     remains were committed to their parent earth, in the Pooree
     burying-ground. The burying-ground is an enclosed square on
     the sands of Juggernauth.

     “Those sands, after almost a year from the Rutt Jattra,
     are still strewed with the whitened bones of the
     wretched victims of this Indian Moloch, and I indulged
     the idea, whilst standing by the grave, that we were
     taking possession of the land in the name of Jesus our
     Lord. Without disparagement to a few other remains there
     interred, and of whose history I know nothing, I _knew_
     that we were committing to the earth the remains of a
     member of His mystical body; and will He not bring in the
     remnant of His elect, and shall not these, at present,
     wretched Hindoos, bow to His sceptre, and confess Him
     ‘Lord, to the glory of God the Father?’ Then, instead of
     that heartless brutality with which idolatrous remains are
     treated, decent burial will be given them; and instead of
     the howling of jackalls and wild dogs over their remains,
     ‘Devout men will make lamentation,’ though they will
     not sorrow as ‘those who have no hope.’ These remarks,
     dearest brother, are indulged in, rather to ease my own
     heart, than to comfort you and your sorrowing family. I am
     inexpressibly afflicted for this my brother, but what is my
     grief compared with his family’s? I send off this blotted
     and only copy, both that you may receive it within a due
     time of your knowledge of the afflicting event; and that
     no discretion may remain with me as to multiplying copies.
     Mrs. Corrie joins me in tender sympathy to all your house.”

For the remaining portion of the month of May, Mr. Corrie continued
to gain no strength. A change of air was, therefore recommended, and
he removed to Cuttack, about fifty miles inland. There it pleased
God to recover him surprisingly fast. But in a letter to Mr. Sherer,
dated June 13, 1823, he observed:--

     “By the frequent attacks of illness I have of late
     experienced, our thoughts are sometimes directed towards
     you [in England]; but I must remain another year in order
     to the pension. The Lord only knows what time may bring
     forth. I feel most reluctant to leave India, and nothing
     but necessity shall lead me to leave it at present.”

Ten days later Mr. Corrie writes to his brother:

                                 “Cuttack, Orissa, June 23, 1823.

     “You will have heard the reason for my being here, so I
     will not repeat the history of my ailment. I am, through
     Divine mercy, much better, but this enfeebling climate is
     not favourable to the recovery of strength, especially
     at the age of forty-six. You accuse me of writing
     despondingly, I am not aware of any such feeling; though
     sickness induces reflection, and ‘it is a serious thing to
     die.’ Although my faith in the Redeemer is unshaken, and
     affords at times strong consolation, yet the presence of
     sin often clouds the view. But I will not fill my paper
     with such reflections.

     “On the death of the Archdeacon about two months after that
     of the Bishop, Parson and I were appointed Ecclesiastical
     Commissioners. The Archdeacon of Bombay remonstrated
     against our appointment, and some of the Chaplains have
     acted without reference to us. We have gone on quietly;
     as in fact, there is little for us to do officially; and
     I should not wonder to see in some of the high church
     Reviews, (if opportunity offer) accusations of neglect. The
     fact is, the Bishop has no authority whatever beyond what
     his personal character may procure him. The late Bishop
     laboured all his Indian life, to establish an authority
     independent of the local Government. This was resisted
     covertly by the Government, and was felt to be a grievance
     by the Chaplains. I rejoice greatly in Mr. Heber’s
     appointment, and trust it is a token for good to the
     established church in India. Nothing short of annihilation
     as a society, will be refused him by the Church Missionary
     Society in Calcutta; and in truth, everything short of a
     separate existence for it, was repeatedly offered to the
     late Bishop.

     “I should not have entered on this subject, except to tell
     you how in the providence of God, I have been affected by
     events.”

During Mr. Corrie’s absence from the Presidency, the Rev. Isaac
Wilson arrived from England, and the Calcutta corresponding Committee
of the Church Missionary Society having thus obtained the aid of a
clergyman, whom they could appoint as secretary, decided on forming
a Church Missionary Association, as had been done at Madras. Up to
this time, it will be remembered, the concerns of the Society for
Missions to Africa and the East, had been conducted in Bengal by a
Committee appointed originally from England; so that although the
friends of religion had by this arrangement possessed the means of
substantially contributing to the support of Missions, yet they had
not been formally embodied in a Society. The jealousy and opposition
of Government to Missionary operations having now, however, somewhat
abated, it was thought important to take advantage of the first
favourable opportunity that presented itself, to place the Church
Missionary Society on a more definite footing. The arrival in India
of an episcopally ordained Missionary, who could render essential aid
to an object that appeared so desirable, decided the corresponding
Committee to take measures for the formation of an Association so
soon as ever Mr. Corrie should return to the Presidency. This he was
enabled to do during the month of July, and accordingly on the 31st
of that month, the best means for forming such an Association were
taken into consideration. On the 11th of August another meeting of
the corresponding Committee and their friends was held, at which
rules for the conducting of a Church Missionary Association were
provisionally agreed upon; and with a view to a public meeting
towards the end of the month, copies of the proceedings of the
Committee were in the meantime printed and circulated for the
information of the subscribers to Church Missions in Bengal. On the
28th of August a public meeting was held, and the Calcutta Church
Missionary Association was formed, Mr. Corrie being chosen the first
President. In the Report of the proceedings on the latter occasion,
it is stated that

     “The Rev. D. Corrie, in accepting the office of President
     of the Association, addressed the meeting in a speech
     which breathed an ardent spirit of piety, of affection,
     and of zeal for the sacred cause of Missions. It would be
     impossible to convey any adequate idea of it by a cursory
     mention in this place of the persuasive topics then so
     feelingly urged. Suffice it, therefore, to say, that, as
     Mr. Corrie himself was deeply affected, so he made a deep
     impression upon the whole audience.”

The formation of this Association was not, however, effected without
some little opposition, but as that appears to have arisen from a
misunderstanding of the motives and relative positions of the parties
concerned, and was speedily allayed, it is therefore here mentioned
merely in deference to the truth of history.

Respecting his own affairs Mr. Corrie wrote to Mr. Sherer, then in
England:--

                                        “Calcutta, Sep. 11, 1823.

     “We are all, through mercy, quite well. We cannot be so
     much alone as my state of body requires, but we are more
     alone than when you were here, and our souls and bodies
     benefit by it; though I cannot but regret the partial
     exclusion it occasions from some of the excellent of the
     earth.

     “Of public affairs I can say nothing, except that a
     Committee for public Instruction is formed. This was
     planned under Mr. Adam’s reign. A picture of him was voted
     after Lord Amherst’s arrival, by a great meeting at the
     Town-hall. Mr. A. is gone to Bombay in very bad health.

     “Our great man, the Bishop, will soon, we hope, be here. He
     will come opportunely for our Missionary affairs, and his
     coming will prove, we trust, a blessing to many. They say
     he means to make the senior Chaplain Archdeacon; whether
     that means Mr. Shepherd, or myself, I know not, and am not
     anxious about it. I should lose in point of emolument, but
     the ease would suit me in my present state of health. I
     trust I can bless God for an increasing indifference as to
     outward things and distinctions.

     “Mr. Jetter, about a fortnight since, baptized a young
     Brahmin; and inquirers increase at Mirzapore. The place
     is becoming known. It is now, also, assuming a pleasing
     appearance.”

According to expectation, Bishop Heber reached India at the beginning
of Oct. 1823. So soon as ever it was known that the Bishop had
reached Saugur, Mr. Corrie, as senior chaplain, Mr. Abbott as
registrar of the diocese, and Principal Mill of Bishop’s College,
went down the river in the government yacht, to conduct his lordship
to Calcutta. On Saturday, Oct. 18th, the Bishop was installed in
the Cathedral, and on the following Monday was pleased to appoint
Mr. Corrie to the Archdeaconry of Calcutta. With reference to that
circumstance Bishop Heber wrote to Mr. Williams Wynn.[114]

     “I have bestowed the Archdeaconry, much to my satisfaction,
     on the senior resident chaplain, Mr. Corrie, who is
     extremely popular in the place, and one of the most amiable
     and gentlemanly men in manners and temper, I ever met with.”

In a letter from Dum Dum, Nov. 3, 1823, announcing his appointment
to the Archdeaconry, Mr. Corrie also informs Mr. Sherer:--

     “We are miserably off for Chaplains, and you will see from
     the date that I am at Dum Dum doing duty there until we
     get a reinforcement. I am, however, but weak, being on the
     recovery from a fever which was brought on by going out in
     the heat, to marry a couple about the middle of October.
     I had become quite unfit for the Presidency duties. The
     sight of the Cathedral used to make me ill, from the weak
     state into which I had fallen; and I trembled like a leaf
     in the breeze when I ascended the steps of either desk or
     pulpit. At the same time I could not leave the country, not
     being entitled to the pension, for a year to come. I am now
     relieved from those distressing occasions, and my mind is
     eased of a burden. I feel that, humanly speaking, I may yet
     be strong here, and do a little in the Missionary cause.”

Nor were these Mr. Corrie’s anticipations with respect to his health
premature; for being now released from the duties of the Cathedral,
he gradually recovered his strength, and attained to such a
healthiness of appearance, that persons who had not seen him for some
time, could scarcely imagine that he had been so seriously ill.

But besides the beneficial change which had thus been effected in
Archdeacon Corrie’s personal condition, it was no small satisfaction
to him to find, that in carrying on the affairs of the Church
Missionary Society, he could now have the advantage of the support
and direction of his Diocesan. For the difficulties in the way of
co-operating with that society, which appeared insuperable to the
late Bishop Middleton, having been either surmounted or removed,
it became the pleasant duty of the Archdeacon, to propose that the
Bishop of Calcutta should be respectfully requested to accept the
office of President of the Auxiliary Church Missionary Society,
which was formed in that city, on the 1st of December 1823. Nor,
after the active part which he had taken in the proceedings of the
Society, could it be otherwise than gratifying to the Archdeacon, to
hear Bishop Heber, on that occasion, publicly express his lordship’s
conviction, that the Church Missionary Society, in conjunction with
others of a similar nature, had been the means of accomplishing
extensive good.

For the two months following the occasion here referred to,
Archdeacon Corrie was chiefly resident at Dum Dum. To his brother he
writes from

                                       “Calcutta, March 11, 1824.

     “Our hot season has commenced. During the cold season
     we have been residing chiefly at Dum Dum, the Artillery
     station, seven miles from the fort, where, since my
     preferment, I have done the Chaplain’s duty. Mr. Crauford,
     now Chaplain of the Old Church, having friends in the
     Artillery regiment, with whom he spends some days every
     week, has agreed to take the duties of Dum Dum for the
     present, leaving to me the charge of the old church. In
     this Mr. Wilson, a Church Missionary, assists me; so that
     I have had, as yet, no relief, except from the occasional
     duties of this large place. And indeed, this was all I
     desired, as, when not exposed to the sun and consequent
     fatigue, I am as well as I am likely, with my nervous
     frame, to be anywhere. We must now consider ourselves fixed
     here for seven years, should life be prolonged. What may
     be necessary for our children in that period, we know not.
     Hitherto they have enjoyed good health; and if it please
     God to continue it to them, we do not mean to separate them
     from us. But we experience in fact, I trust, as well as in
     theory, our dependence on a higher power, and are disposed
     to do what may be His holy will, as we discover it.

     “Of our public affairs you hear through public channels.
     Of private and family affairs I do not like to say much
     on paper. The bishop has proved toward myself most
     disinterested and kind. Had he been less impartial and
     less feeling than he is, I should not now have been here.
     Repeated attacks of fever had so weakened me, that I could
     not go through my duties; and here no unemployed clergyman
     is at hand to help a friend in need. I was therefore,
     preparing for a voyage to the Cape, which by draining our
     resources would both have kept us low in circumstances, and
     would have sent me back to what had proved a distressing
     situation. We cannot therefore, but feel the hand of
     Providence in the very considerate kindness of the Bishop.
     He has met with much annoyance, I fear, in consequence,
     from quarters where submission to Episcopal authority used
     to be the order of the day; but which, like all order not
     founded on Scripture principles, is only submitted to when
     on their own side. I do not say that Episcopacy is not
     founded on Scripture, but that, _all obedience_ to it does
     not rest on the same foundation. I can truly say, I never
     took a step in our Church Missionary proceedings which had
     not the sanction of episcopal principles.

     “We have now three Missionaries from the Society for
     the Propagation of the Gospel. The College has begun
     operations, and I feel no little satisfaction that the
     first student is a youth previously prepared by the Church
     Missionary Society. He is given up to the Society for
     the Propagation of the Gospel, partly because they have
     funds unappropriated, and the Church Missionary Society
     has not, and partly because I could not find among our
     friends the support I wished for in respect of this youth.
     Alas! how much of human infirmity cleaves to us all; for
     I do not pretend to be free from it, and others see more,
     perhaps than I should like to acknowledge. Our Bishop is
     the most free from party-views of any man I ever met with.
     In a ruler this is beautiful, and I have felt the benefit
     resulting from it. But a few years ago it seemed as if it
     was impossible to exercise such a spirit. Certainly Bishop
     Heber in those days, would not have been raised to the
     Bench; when unlimited submission was the only condition of
     cooperation. Some would have given up the Church Missionary
     Society, and have resolved all the Episcopal Societies into
     the Diocesan Committee. I withstood it, and held what is
     now acknowledged, that the Bishop is (such) in his office
     alone, and that whenever he sits in committee, he sits as a
     private member, and not as Bishop. Hence he can sit in any
     Society conducted on episcopal principles. The time indeed
     seems approaching when all societies will send out men of a
     similar spirit, and then our co-operation will be complete.
     The three men, of the Society for the Propagation of the
     Gospel, appear truly pious, though as yet they manifest not
     that love of prayer and religious exercises which maintain
     religion in its power.

     “I long to hear more of you all, but we must be content, I
     believe, to endure this longing as a necessary concomitant
     of our voluntary banishment. I earnestly wish you would,
     as you have opportunity, direct the attention of young
     men of piety to this country. Of twenty-six Chaplains
     allowed for Bengal, only thirteen are present; the distress
     consequently is great, especially in Calcutta. No one of
     us can be ill, or omit a sermon, without casting additional
     labour on men already fully employed, whilst the Dissenters
     are in number strong; both exhibiting variety to draw
     people, and relieving each other from too much work.

     “Our Government has declared war against the king of
     Burmah, and an expedition is ordered against that country.
     We have had skirmishing already on the borders, and have
     lost some officers. Happily there is no power in the
     interior to disturb us at present. Runjeet Sing, the king
     of Lahore, is moving on the banks of the Indus; and it is
     said an army of observation is forming on the Bombay side,
     to watch him. We are all well, and expecting a journey
     through the Upper Provinces in company with the Bishop and
     family, to commence in June.”

Before the time arrived for undertaking the journey here mentioned
as in prospect, Archdeacon Corrie was called upon to officiate at
the ordination of Christian David, a native of Malabar. This person
had been a pupil of Schwartz, and had for many years been employed
as a catechist in Ceylon, by the Society for promoting Christian
knowledge. He had proved himself to be so faithful a labourer, in
the Christian cause, that except for some legal scruple on the part
of Bishop Middleton, he would have received ordination from that
prelate in 1821. He now came to Calcutta, bringing with him the
recommendation of Archdeacon Twistleton, and for a title, a colonial
chaplaincy to which he had been appointed by Sir Edward Barnes, the
Governor of Ceylon. The day fixed upon by Bishop Heber, for the
ordination of Christian David, was Ascension-day (May 27, 1824,)
and on the following Trinity Sunday, he was ordained priest. With
reference to that most interesting event, Archdeacon Corrie wrote


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                        “Calcutta, June 10, 1824.

     “I had to examine him on such points as a missionary to the
     heathen, unacquainted with Western science should know.
     The Bishop was so pleased with my questions and Christian
     David’s answers, that he has sent a copy of them to the
     Archbishop of Canterbury.”

After some observations on private matters, the Archdeacon then adds:

     “All public religious affairs you will learn from the
     Missionary Register. A Ladies’ Society for promoting native
     female education; Lady Amherst, Patroness!![115] Who would
     have dreamt of this a few years ago?

     “We set out next week with the Bishop, but a difficulty has
     arisen about my being absent at the same time [with him] I
     being _ex officio_ Commissary. This will in all probability
     bring us back from Chunar. I have got over the hot season
     without a fever, and am now tolerably well, though
     constrained to keep in doors. I look forward to coming to
     England as a dream of which the reality is barely probable.
     O, may we be more in the contemplation of our heavenly
     home! I have no reason to be dissatisfied with the world,
     further than as sin renders it uneasy to me, sometimes me
     to it; and my children will perhaps be better off by my
     remaining here. For the rest, I have but little anxiety;
     and home is home, in a Christian, as well as in a worldly
     sense; nor shall we be at home until we get to heaven.”

The difficulty referred to in the foregoing letter, as regarded the
absence of both Bishop and Archdeacon from Calcutta at the same time,
having been surmounted, Bishop Heber, accompanied by his Chaplain,
Mr. Stowe, commenced his journey toward the upper provinces on the
15th of June, 1824. Archdeacon Corrie, with his wife and children,
followed in a separate budgerow. After three days voyage on the
river, they parted company; the Bishop and his chaplain proceeding to
Dacca, whilst the Archdeacon and his family passed on by Berhampore,
and Malda, to Bhaugulpore, where they were to wait for the Bishop.
But in the meantime Mr. Stowe was taken dangerously ill at Dacca,
and died there on the 17th of July.[116] Bishop Heber joined the
Archdeacon’s party on the 10th of August, and proceeded to visit the
several stations of Monghyr, Patna, Dinapore, Buxar, Benares, Chunar,
&c., in succession.[117] When, near Allahabad, the Archdeacon wrote
to his brother:--

                                                 “Sept. 12, 1824.

     “We have seen much done here in the way of preparation; but
     then it is much only as compared with the former state of
     things. With reference to what remains to be done, nothing
     comparatively has been accomplished. The country near
     Allahabad, which the English possessed when I arrived in
     Bengal, extended in length about twelve hundred miles, by
     an average breadth of one hundred and fifty or two hundred.
     That constituted the Bengal Presidency. The Ganges may be
     considered a line running through the length of the tract,
     dividing it into two parts. Throughout this extent, there
     was only one place of Protestant worship [and that] in
     Calcutta; and not a _building_ appropriated to worship out
     of Calcutta, belonging to the English. There are now in
     Calcutta four places of worship in the Established Church;
     besides the Mission College, and three Dissenting Chapels.
     There is a Church at Dacca, Benares, Chunar, Futtyghur,
     and Meerut. Churches are in the course of erection at Agra
     and Cawnpore. Whilst at the old stations of Dinapore and
     Berhampore, public worship is still performed in an empty
     barrack. There are at Monghyr and Benares, dissenting
     Chapels, and perhaps at some of the upper stations also.
     All this has not been accomplished without considerable
     individual exertion, as well as public support: and
     though individual piety is still lamentably scarce, yet
     much more of public attention to religious observances
     prevails than formerly; and also much more of individual
     piety. With respect to the natives, when I arrived in the
     country, a few converts were found at Serampore; and a
     few, I believe existed at Dinapore: nor were there any
     attempts [to convert the natives] entered upon beyond
     those places, except at Cutwa, where the late missionary,
     Chamberlain,[118] had settled. Now, we have a few native
     converts in Calcutta, at Burdwan, and at Cutwa and its
     branch in Beerbhoom; at Monghyr, Buxar, Benares, Chunar
     and Meerut. In each of these places, a few converts are
     found; and what will eventually work greatly for the good
     of the heathen, some of the Roman Catholic converts, and
     descendants of Europeans, who had become quite native in
     their habits and language, are attracted by the labours of
     the missionaries at those places; and in some of them, as
     at Chunar, where the native congregation is the largest
     on the side of India, [the Roman Catholics] constitute
     the chief part. Besides these, I might mention Meerut,
     and Futtyghur, where missionaries are labouring, and some
     converts have been gained. Thus where all was darkness,
     now, here and there, a glimmering of light begins to
     appear. But a reference to the situation of these places
     on a map, and of the small number to whom the means of
     grace have proved effectual at each place, will shew you
     how little has yet been accomplished. How much remains
     to be done, ere this people can possess even the means
     of knowing the way of life! We are now, as you know,
     attending the Bishop. His visit cannot fail to increase
     the disposition of the British to help on the work of
     missions. At Buxar, he sat down in the hut of the native
     catechist, and heard the Christians read; and questioned
     them in their catechisms; at Benares, he went in his robes
     to the Hindoostanee chapel, where Mr. Morris officiates,
     and pronounced the blessing; and the same at Chunar. He
     has acquired sufficient Hindoostanee to give the blessing
     in that language. Also at Benares, he administered
     Confirmation to fourteen native Christians, and afterwards
     the Lord’s Supper: and at Chunar to fifty-seven native
     Christians. He asked the questions and pronounced the
     prayer, in Confirmation, in Hindoostanee, and also the
     words addressed in giving the elements in the Lord’s
     Supper. In the latter ordinance, he was assisted at Benares
     by Mr. Morris; and at Chunar by myself. But, in general, I
     have not been able to do more than attend him in public;
     my state of weakness not allowing of visiting or dining
     from home. Some of the old alarmists still remain, who,
     by these proceedings, are silenced if not convinced; and
     scoffers are put to shame. The Bishop, also, visits all
     the missionary native schools, as he proceeds; and the
     Missionaries are greatly encouraged by the interest he
     takes in their proceedings.”

The Archdeacon then adds:--

     “I must say a few words about myself. The season has not
     been favourable, as yet, for restoring my strength. We
     have had comparatively little rain; and the east wind
     failed by the 20th of August. Since then the west-wind has
     blown: and now in the afternoon blows hot. The river is
     fallen as much as is usual in November. Notwithstanding,
     I am greatly stronger than when in Calcutta, and have no
     positive disease: at least I think so. We now begin to feel
     the coolness at night--the forerunner of the cool season.
     Six weeks will bring it here. I then hope, with care, to
     recruit, and feel much the goodness of God in allowing me
     this hope.”

On the 27th of November 1824, Archdeacon Corrie addressed the
following letter to Mr. Buckworth, from Cawnpore:--

     “You will have heard, from my friends, of the debilitating
     effects this climate has at length began to have on my
     frame; but I am thankful to be able to say, that I am
     better this year than last. Knowing the cooler nature of
     this part of the country, at this season [of the year,]
     the Bishop kindly invited me to accompany him [on his
     visitation], and here we arrived early in October. The
     latitude is five degrees higher [North] than that of
     Calcutta; and, being within two hundred miles of the Snowy
     Mountains, is more than proportionably cooler. Your parish
     news is very interesting to me; and the increase of your
     places of worship must be a source of great gratification
     to you. If it should be given me to be your helper in one
     of these Churches, separate from occasional duties, some
     day, it would, I trust, be a comfort to both of us. But
     it becomes us more than ever not to boast, or lay plans
     respecting the morrow. We have now passed a fair proportion
     of the days usually assigned to man; and besides this, we
     have both personal experience of a dying nature. I feel
     for my own part, how sickness even may lose the effect of
     impressing the idea of death; and have hourly need to pray
     for more of that quickening Spirit, who alone makes us and
     keeps us alive to God and things divine and eternal. Our
     situation here is quite different from yours,--we have no
     parish annals to record. I arrived at this [station] on the
     day fourteen years after sainted Martyn had dedicated the
     Church. The house he occupied stands close by. The view of
     the place, and the remembrance of what had passed, greatly
     affected me. I arrived on the Sunday morning, after divine
     service had begun; (the Bishop having come on the day
     before) and, as the Chaplain is sick, I had to assist in
     administering the Sacrament; and well it was, on the whole,
     that none present could enter into my feelings, or I should
     have been overcome.

     “You wish to hear tidings of our Bishop; and, from public
     sources, you will have heard of the favour he shews
     generally to the righteous cause. Of the natural amiability
     of the man, it is impossible to convey an adequate idea.
     Our children speak of him always as ‘the dear Bishop.’
     I merely mention this to shew how lovely he appears in
     his general temper and habits. His conversation is very
     lively; and from his large acquaintance with books and
     men, very instructive, and tending to improve those he
     meets with; whilst he industriously seeks opportunities of
     public worship, Sunday and week day; and urges on all the
     importance of attending on the means of grace. Surely this
     land has cause of praise to God, that such an one has been
     placed at the head of affairs here!

     “At this station, there are about two thousand five hundred
     Christians, and the chaplain being sick I remained here,
     to do the parochial duties. Having accompanied the Bishop
     to Lucknow, where we were entertained by the King of
     Oude, I returned hither. The Bishop presented the King
     with a Bible, and a Book of Common Prayer, in the native
     language; and the King was so taken with the Bishop, that
     he begged to have his picture; which was accordingly
     taken immediately, by an eminent English artist, whom the
     King keeps in constant pay. The Bishop went on his way to
     Meerut, Delhi, and Agra; at the latter place I hope to meet
     him, about Christmas; I am now therefore in a sphere I
     greatly like. On Sunday last I had two full services; and
     attended a meeting with the Dragoon regiment on Wednesday,
     and with the Foot regiment last night, and feel no ill
     effects; by which you will judge of the bodily strength
     which is mercifully renewed to me. I have one of the
     learned native converts with me; and he is collecting the
     few native Christians here, and we shall, I hope, be useful
     to them also.”


      [109] Instituted in the year 1782.

      [110] See above,--p.322.

      [111] A printer and printing-press, sent out by the Church
            Missionary Society, had just arrived from England.

      [112] Moonshee Mooneef Masseeh, who was baptised at Chunar
            in 1818.

      [113] A place on the river Hooghley.

      [114] Journal, &c., vol. 3. p. 230, 2nd edit.

      [115] “The Ladies Society for Native female education in
            Calcutta, and its vicinity,” was formed on the 25th
            of March 1824.

      [116] See Life of Bishop Heber, Vol. ii. pp. 217, &c.

      [117] It has not been thought necessary to notice in
            detail, the many interesting occurrences which have
            already been related in Bishop Heber’s Journal and
            Correspondence.

      [118] One of the Baptists.




                             CHAPTER XV.

          CAWNPORE--CALCUTTA--RETURN OF MR. THOMASON--DEATH
                           OF BISHOP HEBER.


It was because Archdeacon Corrie did not find himself equal to the
fatigue of travelling, that when the party reached Lucknow, it was
decided, that instead of proceeding with the Bishop, he should
endeavour to recruit his strength by remaining stationary for a time
at Cawnpore. From that place, therefore, he writes


                      TO THE REV. MR. THOMASON.

                                        “Cawnpore, Dec. 26, 1824.

     “I have been expecting, for some time, to receive a few
     copies of the last Report of our Calcutta Church Missionary
     Society. I am very desirous of endeavouring to help the
     funds; but cannot well make applications without giving
     some information as to our plans. I begin to fear that
     even if about eight copies were dispatched immediately,
     they would not reach me in time, as I am only waiting the
     Bishop’s decision as to my movements. I have now done
     the duty here, for five Sundays, and expect to be here
     about three Sundays more. I could much have wished Mr.
     Torriano[119] to have arrived before I leave, but he will
     find his way comparatively smooth. You know I brought
     Fuez Messeeh with me from Benares, where he was doing
     little, and had fallen ill. He is still prevented by the
     cough, which has for some time affected him, from doing
     all I believe he is willing to do for the gospel. I have
     every reason to believe him to be a partaker of Divine
     grace; though his talent in communicating what he knows to
     others, is not great. He, on our arrival, brought a few of
     the families of the Christian drummers and fifers to our
     house, for Sunday worship; and about six of their girls are
     learning to read Hindoostanee and to sew, with Mrs. Corrie.
     About three weeks ago, Mr. Fisher, Peter Dilsooke and his
     wife Ruth, with their two sons came here. They had a chit
     [letter] from Mr. Fisher, and I have since written to him,
     and ascertained that he thinks well of them as Christians.
     I have retained him on ten rupees a month, to teach such
     Christians [adults] as wish to learn to read the Scriptures
     in their native tongue, and Nagree character, and he has a
     school in the lines, of eight adults; and his wife teaches
     the Christian girls in our house, their two boys go to the
     Free School. There are three native corps here generally.
     The Christians connected with them are not fewer than sixty
     or seventy; and there are many of a similar class connected
     with the many public offices of the field command,
     besides a considerable number of poor people of the same
     description, who resort to Cawnpore, as the Calcutta of the
     Upper Provinces. The native population too, is wonderfully
     increased since I was resident here. On the whole, this
     place calls loudly for Missionary help; and I greatly hope
     something may be done, at least for those who profess
     Christianity, and understand only the native language.
     Already our congregation on Sunday last had increased to
     about twenty; and I am writing to Chunar for copies of the
     native catechism, and Nagree hymns, which are much desired
     by some of the Christians. I happily got a supply of the
     Scriptures in various languages. Should the Bishop decide
     on my residing in the Upper Provinces, these stores will
     prove invaluable; and become the means of blessing, I hope,
     to many. The duties of a Chaplain, I know from experience,
     leave him, at such stations as this, little leisure for
     extra-parochial engagements. As I shall have more leisure
     for such pursuits, with liberty to remove from place to
     place, I shall consider it a peculiar happiness to be the
     means of establishing christian worship, for the class of
     people who are to be found at every station professing
     Christianity, and knowing only the native language.

     “I believe no copies of the ‘Outline of Ancient
     History,’[120] have been sent to Bombay; will you be so
     good as to send twelve or twenty copies to Mr. Farish,
     as a specimen, that more may be sent if required? The
     first class of native youths, in the Free School here,
     are reading it; and get, from the former chapters of the
     work, such information on the early religious history
     of the world, as they would not otherwise at present
     obtain. This Free School will, I hope, prove very useful
     to this part of the country. There are ten boys and ten
     girls already on the foundation, on the plan of the
     Calcutta Free School. Many poor Christian day-scholars,
     and seventeen natives, are learning English. There are
     also, belonging to the Institution, a Persian and Hindee
     school, containing together about one hundred children; who
     read only the School-book Society’s books. The young man
     who is schoolmaster, is a conscientious man, and attends
     diligently to the duties of the school. The divisions you
     have heard of nearly annihilated the school for a time; and
     an opposition school was opened for day-scholars. This will
     eventually do no harm. Competition will produce exertion,
     and education will be better forwarded. It is wonderful
     how much a little superintendence may help on these things,
     where there is no selfish end in view, and no seeking
     of preeminence; and I cannot but hope Mr. Torriano will
     prove a great blessing to this place. How would it have
     rejoiced the heart of Martyn, could he have had the chief
     authorities associated by order of Government, to assist
     him in the work of education; and how gladly would he have
     made himself their servant in the work, for Jesus’ sake!
     One poor blind man, who lived in an outhouse of Martyn’s,
     and received a small monthly sum from him, often comes to
     our house; and affords a mournful pleasure in reminding me
     of some little occurrence of those times. A wealthy native
     too, who lived next door to us, and who was intimate with
     Sabat and Abdool Messeeh, sent his nephew to me, a few days
     ago, to make ‘Salaam;’ and to express to me the pleasure
     he derived from his acquaintance with Martyn. These are
     all the traces I have found of that ‘excellent one of the
     earth,’ at the station.”

The Archdeacon remained still another month at Cawnpore, and then
proceeded toward the valley of the Dhoon,[121] with the intention of
spending the hot season there. He writes to his sister, in a letter
dated

                                                  “March 6, 1825.

     “We left Cawnpore on January 24; were one Sunday
     at Futtyghur, and two at Meerut, and are to-day at
     Muzuffernugur, three marches N. W. of Meerut, and in sight
     of the snowy mountains. At Futtyghur we met dear old
     Abdool, who is grown remarkably larger, but is reduced
     in strength. At Meerut we enjoyed the society of several
     excellent persons. Mr. Fisher has regular service in a
     fine church, on the plan of the cathedral in Calcutta, on
     Wednesdays and Fridays, besides the morning and evening
     service on Sundays.... I was much pleased with what I saw
     of Mr. F., and his labours are blessed.

     “We are proceeding to the Dhoon, a valley on the first
     range of hills. We expect to reach the Ghaut[122] in five
     days, and to be at Dehrah, the head station on the Dhoon,
     by next Sunday. We have in company with us, a son of
     Mr. Layard of Uffington,[123] who has suffered from the
     climate, although he has been only a year in the country;
     but will, I hope, recover among the hills, as he has no
     symptoms of serious illness about him. I am, through great
     mercy, quite well. I do not expect, indeed, that my nerves,
     never strong, will be ever what they were; still I am well,
     have recovered my former appearance and size, and have
     nothing to complain of.

     “I have daily more cause for thankfulness in my present
     appointment. Being confined to no station, I can go
     generally where I am likely to be most useful; and retreat,
     as we are now doing, from the violence of the hot winds.
     The country acquired by the Nepaul war is likely to be of
     great service as a retreat for invalids from the burning
     plains. There is a mountain near Dehrah in the Dhoon, which
     can be climbed with some difficulty, and has a fine level
     top where we can pitch our tent, and have the thermometer
     at 60° during the month of May. There we expect to pass
     the months of April and May, and to descend when the rains
     threaten; and so return to the plains. Farther on, the
     climate is equally favourable; with a greater range to roam
     over; but we are content to take the nearest shelter, as I
     have no desire after field sports, and we are happy enough
     at home. We have one of the Agra youths, named Amannee,
     with us, so that we make a congregation of six, and enjoy
     the repose of the sabbath much. We have a couple of small
     camel-trunks filled with books, and so carry with us food
     for the mind as well as the body.... Thus you know all our
     affairs. Surrounded by temporal mercies, I trust we are
     still saying, ‘Whom have we in heaven but Thee, and there
     is none on earth, &c. &c.’”

To his brother, the Archdeacon writes:--

                                   “Dehrah Dhoon, March 30, 1825.

     “I am so much recruited in strength as to indulge the
     hope of some further years of further endeavour for the
     good of India. You hear of our public affairs from public
     sources, but there are certain discouragements in the
     situation of affairs, both as it respects church and state,
     which you will not hear, and which it is scarcely worth
     while to fill one’s paper with. He ‘whose kingdom ruleth
     over all,’ is engaged to make ‘all things work together
     for good to them that love Him,’ and with His love in
     our hearts what need disquiet us?... Our difficulties in
     church-matters arise chiefly from want of cordial union,
     and from the fluctuating nature of our Society, which
     renders it necessary to begin our affairs anew every few
     years; and causes the labour of communicating intelligence
     to be continually recurring. But the church generally is, I
     doubt not, advancing among us; and we must not grow weary;
     however, of necessity, we grow less able to do what we
     would. In our Bishop we have all we can have in one man, to
     unite us and to help our work by its various instruments.

     “You would be delighted if you could visit us in our
     present situation. We are living on the ridge of Kalunga
     hill, near where General Gillespie fell ten years ago.[124]
     The house we occupy is a kind of hunting bungalow, three
     miles from cantonments, belonging to the commanding
     officer here. Leopards in plenty live around us, and some
     of our workmen going a few days ago to drink water at a
     pool, in a recess in the wood, spied a large tiger on the
     opposite side. We, however, have nothing to fear from them;
     and now the novelty is over, the day passes in our usual
     studies and pursuits, very happily. The children and I ride
     on ponies, through the path-ways, early in the morning;
     with a few men with large sticks ahead, to frighten away
     any thing that might come among us. We have had snow on
     the neighbouring hill, within a week, and specks of it are
     still visible. We contemplate ascending the second range
     of hills, about 8,000 feet above those we now are on; and
     to pitch our tent there, during the approaching months of
     April and May, where the thermometer ranges, we are told,
     between 60° and 70°. Here we are happy to have it, from
     twelve o’clock to six, about 80°.... Even this is a relief
     unspeakable from the plains, and our nights are cool; the
     wind regularly setting-in, in the evening, from the snowy
     mountains. I have nothing to say about this people, (who
     differ a good deal from the people of the plains,) because
     I know but little about them.”

In another letter to his brother, dated 6th of April, Archdeacon
Corrie observes:--

     “I have told G. that our Bishop confirmed about 150 adult
     natives, at the different Church Missionary stations
     between this and Calcutta; which shows that we labour not
     in vain. The progress, though slow, is still a progress,
     in respect of the diffusion of Divine truth, in these
     parts. It will be an especial care to establish seminaries,
     at the principal stations, for the instruction of native
     christian youths, on as permanent a footing as we can.
     Our territories, in this part of the world, are beginning
     to be too extensive. We can scarcely hope to have men, at
     the head of affairs, always of capacity enough for such
     a load of government; but He who ruleth over all, will
     doubtless use us for some good purpose, to this benighted
     land. May those of us who feel the importance of this
     subject be up and doing! There is a general falling off
     amongst the Hindoos, from their former system. They have no
     reverence for the usual forms of an oath. They set little
     by the Brahmins generally; and, except on festivals, and
     at particularly celebrated places, their idolatrous rites
     are fallen into considerable disuse. The Hindoos, too,
     much more generally than formerly, keep the Mahomedan
     festivals. These facts are noticed by all the men in
     office, throughout the country. From this, however, no good
     has, as yet, arisen, to the righteous cause. Though less
     observant of their own rites, they know nothing of the
     gospel that they should value it. Their festivals resemble
     an English fair, much more than what we consider by the
     word ‘worship;’ and it is not to be wondered at, that the
     natural man loves these occasions; or that a people so
     circumstanced, should at first turn away from the humbling,
     self-denying truths of the gospel, when set before them.

     “These regions, [the Dhoon] are becoming much resorted to
     at this season by the British, on account of the coolness
     of the climate. I have a christian youth with me, whom I
     daily instruct, and we met here a Brahmin, who has been
     baptized by one of the Baptist Missionaries. He would not
     stay with his teacher, having been long used to a roving
     life. He seems quite convinced of the supreme importance of
     Christianity. He reads the scriptures with me; and I hope
     may grow in knowledge, and in grace.”

To Mr. Sherer, who had just arrived in Calcutta from England, in
company with the Rev. Francis Goode, one of the Company’s Chaplains,
the Archdeacon writes:--

                                                   “May 25, 1825.

     “The arrival of Mr. Goode, after some recent comers, is a
     source of much thanksgiving. I can now say, as far as the
     church in India is concerned, ‘Lord! now lettest thou thy
     servant depart, either to some retreat for a time on earth,
     or to the rest which remaineth!’ I speak only in respect of
     the prospects of the church at this Presidency, which, from
     the several valuable ministers she now possesses, may well
     do without so bruised a reed as I am.

     “Mr. Newton,[125] you will know, is now the financial
     secretary of our Church Missionary Society. He, above all
     our Committee, has been with me like-minded, entering
     with all his spirit into our concerns, and looking our
     difficulties in the face. Having, as I hope, got Mirzapore
     into some form, we must go on cautiously; by which I mean,
     have our resources in view before we extend our plans. I am
     now anxious to get the Female Central School built, and to
     extend no more, but rather contract the present scale of
     small schools.”

It will have been seen that it was in Bishop Heber’s contemplation,
that the Archdeacon should permanently reside in the Upper Provinces,
that by this means more effectual assistance might be rendered to
the Bishop in administering the affairs of his vast diocese. It was
however, ultimately arranged that whilst Bishop Heber was visiting
Madras and Bombay, the Archdeacon should proceed to Calcutta. With
this object in view, Archdeacon Corrie left the Dhoon, in the
beginning of June, for Meerut. From that place he wrote


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                                  “June 25, 1825.

     “We have been here (as you will have heard through Mrs.
     Ellerton) a week. I feel some comfort in the idea of being
     a hundred miles nearer to you, but here, I apprehend, we
     must stay a month at least. The season has been unusually
     warm here. For several years past, the seasons have proved
     irregular, but this year the regular hot winds have been
     blowing, and the natives anticipate a plentiful production
     of the fruits of the earth. We are tied in the meantime;
     and on every account I must not expose myself [to the heat]
     more than I can help. We are at present in a bungalow which
     Parson and his family inhabited most of the time they were
     at Meerut. It is in Mr. Fisher’s compound; and here, I
     believe, we must stay, for no other place is to be found.
     An additional regiment of Cavalry and one of Infantry, are
     to be here, so that every corner is filled. We have been
     living with the Fishers almost entirely, but have now got
     their leave to supply ourselves in this bungalow.

     “Mr. F. is more attended to than any chaplain in the
     country, by the upper classes, as well as by the lower; and
     has a wide correspondence among conductors, writers, &c. at
     surrounding stations. He has also a native congregation.
     This is doubtless his proper work. A missionary, however,
     would not at all interfere with any thing doing here. It
     is evidently of God alone, that the few natives professing
     christianity have been drawn together and kept together.
     Many are reported as prepared for the reception of
     christianity at Delhi, and Mr. H. Fisher yesterday went to
     reside there, with Anund Musseeh. Anund has been unwell
     with the small-pox, and unable to attend Mr. Fisher, for
     scriptural instruction, as the Bishop desired; so that
     his ordination must be postponed until some more distant
     period. I am anxious to hear from the Church Missionary
     Committee respecting Abdool and Bowley, in answer to my
     letter of the 14th of April. If I hear nothing I shall
     bring them down, considering the Bishop’s wishes sufficient
     authority.”

To the same relative, the Archdeacon again wrote

                                                  “July 23, 1825.

     “We purpose leaving this [Meerut] at the end of August,
     and shall get down to you speedily. I told you that the
     heat affected me, but by keeping quiet, I have avoided
     feeling more than languor. I have not yet called on any,
     except one or two in the next premises around us. I have
     always assisted Mr. Fisher; and kept his flock together
     during twelve days he was absent at Lehornupore and
     Deyrah, where his son John is. He and his son Samuel had a
     narrow escape from drowning, on their return. One of the
     mountain-torrents came down suddenly. A _Suwarr_,[126] who
     was with them, escaped with difficulty, together with his
     horse. Samuel’s horse was carried down a good way, but both
     his and Mr. Fisher’s horse, being in better heart than the
     Suwarr’s horse, got over. A pedestrian, who attempted to
     swim over, was drowned.

     “We have now the rains, but scantily. The natives begin to
     say the rains will not be heavy this year.”

In accordance with the purpose expressed in the foregoing letter,
Archdeacon Corrie left Meerut on the 22nd of August. In a letter
addressed to Mr. Sherer, on the 25th of that month, the Archdeacon
remarks:--

     “We left much good at Meerut, and passed our time
     pleasantly; and, I hope, not unprofitably.... We are in
     sight of Futtyghur, from whence I shall dispatch this.
     Goodness and mercy continue to attend us. The weather is
     unusually favourable for us, but the country requires rain.

     “At Meerut we had a Bible Society Sermon on the 14th, and
     a public meeting on the 16th. Considerable interest, above
     former years, was excited, and a fair collection made. Some
     converts to the cause, also, among the upper classes of
     Society.”

On his way to the Presidency, Archdeacon Corrie visited Cawnpore,
Chunar, Benares, and other stations with which he had been before
time connected or acquainted. With regard to Cawnpore, he observed in
a letter to Mr. Sherer, dated

                                      “Allahabad, Sep. 12, 1825.”

     “I wrote to Mr. Thomason, from Cawnpore, about a native
     chapel. I am happy to tell you that little, if anything,
     will be needed from the [Church Missionary] Society to
     accomplish this object. I put a paper into circulation
     before I left, and there was enough for present purposes
     being raised at the station.

     “On the Sunday, which I passed at Chunar, about two
     hundred attended Divine service, of whom about forty were
     unbaptized inhabitants of the place, and most of whom
     attend every sabbath-day. Some of the scholars who have
     received instruction in English, afford the most pleasing
     hopes of their sincere conversion.”

And in a letter to the same relative, he writes from

                                         “Benares, Sep. 26, 1825.

     “We are detained here longer than I wished, but I hope to
     do something for the mission by the delay. Our friends are
     each doing what he can in his sphere. They have suggested
     that I should write a letter to the Committee, which might
     be printed in the Monthly Intelligence, giving some account
     of the schools and congregations. I will send such a
     letter, and it may be printed or not.”

With reference also to this subject, the Archdeacon informs his
brother in a letter dated

                                   “Oct. 11, 1825, above Monghyr.

     “Mr. H. Fisher, at Delhi--his father at Meerut: Mr.
     Torriano, at Cawnpore--have each a native missionary
     who labours around them, and instructs especially those
     natives who profess christianity. This last class is fast
     improving, I would fain hope, in knowledge and character;
     and thus they become ‘Epistles of Christ, read and known’
     among the heathens: and the reproach which formerly
     attended the gospel is lessening.”

Thus wherever the Archdeacon might be, the subject nearest his heart
was, the progress of the gospel among the heathen.

It was on the 25th of October 1825, that Archdeacon Corrie arrived
in Calcutta, on his return from the Upper Provinces. Among the first
things to which the Archdeacon directed his attention, were the
affairs of the Church Missionary Society, which he found to be as
prosperous as could well be expected. At the end of the following
month he was gladdened by the ordination of his long-tried friend
Abdool Messeeh, who, together with Messrs Reichardt and Bowley, was
admitted into the order of Deacons, by Bishop Heber. The ordination
took place on the 30th of November, in the Cathedral of Calcutta,
and in the presence of a large congregation, among whom were more
than twenty clergymen. It was remarked by one who was present on that
interesting occasion, that

     “Nothing could equal the joy of Mr. Corrie: he appeared
     as if he could just then adopt the language of Simeon of
     old. He has watched the gradual progress of every thing:
     he could remember when matters assumed a far different
     semblance.”

On the 23rd of December the Archdeacon attended the Bishop at a
public examination of the children educated in the schools maintained
in the Calcutta Ladies’ Society for Native Female Education; when,
during the examination, the Rajah Boidenauth came forward and
presented the Society with a donation of 20,000 sicca rupees, toward
the erection of a central school. One of the great objects which the
Archdeacon had long had in view, was thus in the progress of being
realized; and as a preliminary measure, he obtained permission to
place under the Ladies’ Society, those Female-schools at Burdwan
which had hitherto been supported by the Church Missionary Society.

These several causes for rejoicing were not, however, without a
corresponding draw-back. The hot season of 1825 had been unusually
unhealthy, and among others who had suffered in health were Mr. and
Mrs. Thomason, especially the latter. This decided Mr. Thomason
to return to Europe early in the spring of 1826. Mr. Sherer, too,
having accomplished the object for which he went out to India, was
preparing to return to his family in England. The Bishop, moreover,
left Calcutta on the 30th of January 1826, for the purpose of holding
visitations in Madras. Under these circumstances Archdeacon Corrie
writes to Mr. Sherer, then on the point of embarking for England:--

                                                  “Feb. 22, 1826.

     “A feeling of desolation oppresses me, which I try to shake
     off, by looking to Him who possesses all fulness, in order
     to supply his needy dependents. In P. I lost my worldly
     adviser, and in Mr. Thomason my religious helper: but the
     Lord liveth. In you, I will not say how much we seem to
     have lost; but this much I cannot but say. There is no
     possibility of my following you in less than five years,
     and what may occur before then, who can tell? It would be
     presumptuous to say any of us shall see that period; and
     yet there is no doubt a secret hope that we shall. How I
     shall part with the mother and the children, I know not. It
     seems as if they ought sooner to go into a more favourable
     climate, and if it were necessary, I suppose the necessity
     would go far to reconcile me to it. My heart goes with you
     to Morcott and Colsterworth; may you be carried to them in
     health and safety, and may the peace of God attend your
     meeting with them! It seems superfluous to say anything
     about my love for them. They need no assurance of it; yet
     it is a relief to write about it.”

Some further account of his condition is given by the Archdeacon


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                                 “March 14, 1826,

     “We continue much as you left us. The wet has set in, and
     the monsoon has been almost constantly against you. The
     Bishop was twenty days reaching Madras. This will delay
     your progress; but great is our happiness in knowing that
     winds and waves obey His will, “whose we are, and whom we
     serve.”

     “Our Friday evening [services] have been but irregularly
     attended. The Government dinners have, no doubt,
     interfered; and next Friday Lady A. has an ‘at home.’
     Shall we ever have ‘the powers that be’ on our side? Yea,
     doubtless, it shall be even so.

     “You will know all about Lord A’s recal before this reaches
     you. May it please God to send us a Governor who will at
     least own his duty in respect of the God of Christians!
     The most painful thing in the present administration is,
     that our duty as Christians is not recognised. Policy is
     avowedly the idol worshipped.

     “I am thankful and happy in my present situation. I know
     not what time, if permitted to me, may bring forth, but
     I cannot at present conceive of happiness in leaving my
     station. A few short years will unite us all, I trust,
     where probably natural feeling will be absorbed in
     relationship to Christ, but not, I apprehend, be forgotten.
     In the mean time, while passing through this ‘valley
     of Baca,’ let our correspondence serve as ‘pools of
     refreshment.’”


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

                                       “Calcutta, April 11, 1826.

     “Before this reaches you, we hope you will have received
     back our dear Sherer, well in all respects. In this
     changing world, we know not what a day may bring forth, but
     we are taught that “sufficient unto the day is the evil
     thereof;” and, therefore, I will anticipate none of those
     things, evil to nature, to which both he on the water and
     his family on land are liable, but trust that your meeting
     has been joyous and thankful. We go on much as Sherer left
     us. The fall of Bhurtpore and peace with Ava,[127] leave
     the country externally quiet, but in so extended an empire,
     composed of such discordant elements, we are less, in
     reality, settled. Two native regiments at Bhurtpore refused
     to go into the trenches; the business was hushed up, but
     a discovery was made of the state of the native mind. The
     fact is, that ‘the powers which be,’ while they fear the
     smallest movement in favour of Christianity, fear nothing
     when saving money is concerned. Whereas the native, if he
     be liberally dealt with, will give you his caste even, if
     you do not demand it all at once. “The Lord reigneth,” must
     be our motto; and though we cannot but see what is doing,
     must refer ourselves, to His power, providence and grace,
     to order all things as shall be for His own glory.

     “Yesterday I completed forty-nine years. Great goodness
     have I experienced, great ingratitude am I conscious of;
     but great is the mercy of God my Saviour; infinite the
     value of Jesus’ blood. Therefore I will hope on, and expect
     to be preserved by “the power of God through faith unto
     salvation.” “He restoreth my soul for his name’s sake.”

Within a few days of the date of the foregoing letter, Archdeacon
Corrie received the afflicting intelligence that it had pleased God
suddenly to remove Bishop Heber from this scene of trial, to the
church triumphant in heaven. Appended to a copy of the letter from
the Rev. Mr. Doran which announced this event, and the circumstances
by which it was accompanied, the Archdeacon wrote


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                       “Calcutta, April 15, 1826.

     “By the copy on the other side you will see with what a
     heavy stroke God has smitten us; doubtless in mercy, though
     we see it not now. Nothing can be added at present to Mr.
     Doran’s account. All here is mute astonishment. Public
     and individual concern is spread over all. I will send
     all the public documents, and will take the first further
     opportunity to send more particulars.”

These particulars are too well known to need repetition in this
place, but the following extract from a letter addressed about that
time by the Archdeacon to his brother, may not be without interest:--

     “You will hear from other sources of the loss all India
     has sustained, in the death of Bishop Heber. My first
     impression was to inform Sherer, who, from being so lately
     among us, could judge more readily of our feelings on the
     occasion. I have printed, and privately distributed, a
     sermon preached at the time; and have sent some copies
     to Mr. Pratt. Mr. Robinson [subsequently archdeacon of
     Madras,] took some copies to send home, with a sermon
     of his own, preached at Trichinopoly, the Sunday after
     the Bishop’s death. We cannot but be anxious as to who
     will succeed to this see. Our late beloved Bishop was so
     entirely a Missionary, that we can scarcely hope to see one
     like him; and in respect of temper and beauty of general
     disposition, to expect the like of him seems utterly
     hopeless. In what I have said of him in the sermon, I have
     said what I know his views were on certain points, rather
     than expressed my own. Such was the natural amiability of
     Bishop Heber’s character, that it was often difficult to
     say whether he acted from nature or grace. But whatever
     might be judged by some, at times, to be errors of
     judgment, the general tenor of his life was so opposed to
     worldly maxims, and what the world would have wished him
     to follow, that there seems no doubt grace was the ruling
     influence of his conduct. The great number of subscribers
     he obtained for the society for the Propagation of the
     Gospel, shews what an influence he had obtained; and how
     many he had drawn over to support the Missionary cause.”

The sermon here alluded to, was preached in the Cathedral Church
of Calcutta, on Sunday, April 23, from Heb. xiii. 7, 8. In a short
notice prefixed to the sermon, the reason for printing it is stated
to be “not any idea of its pretensions to literary merit, but a
sincere desire on the part of the author, to improve the melancholy
occasion of it, to the good of a community with which he had been
connected nearly twenty years.” The Archdeacon added, that as “all
who approached their late beloved and venerated diocesan, could not
but admire his brilliant conversation, various acquirements, and
commanding talents, it was hoped that, the perusal of the sermon
might tend to recommend, to some at least, the cultivation of those
principles of Christian piety which spread a charm over all his other
great qualities.”

The limits within which it is desirable to comprise these memoirs, do
not allow of the insertion here of the vivid sketch of Bishop Heber’s
ministerial life in India, which this sermon contains, but as, in
the letter quoted above, specific reference is made to the Bishop’s
“views on certain points,” it may be proper to quote the outline of
the doctrines which the Archdeacon states himself to have “heard the
deceased prelate preach,” on different occasions.

     “It was the _word of God_ which he administered. For man,
     fallen from God and far from original righteousness,
     he preached a full and free redemption by the blood of
     Christ--justification by faith--the need of the Holy
     Spirit’s grace to incline and enable man to repent, and
     to bring forth fruit meet for repentance, persuading
     man, by the terrors of the Lord, to flee from the wrath
     to come, and by the mercies of Christ, to be reconciled
     unto God--the pleasantness of religious ways--the comfort
     attending the death of the righteous--the terrors of a
     judgment-day to the impenitent, and the rewards of the
     faithful servant--setting forth every Christian duty in
     its relation to Christian principle, in his own peculiarly
     lively and impressive manner.”

It is scarcely necessary to add, that Archdeacon Corrie was among
those who met in the Town-hall of Calcutta, on the 6th of May,
for the purpose of expressing their deep concern at the loss which
India had sustained in the death of Bishop Heber, and for devising
means by which the memory of the labours of that man of God might be
transmitted to future generations.[128]

On the 18th of May, the Archdeacon, after having long desired to see
such an object accomplished, was called upon to take part in the
ceremonial of laying the foundation-stone of a Central School for
the education of native females. Four years, it will be remembered,
had now elapsed since female education in India had been first
commenced on a general plan; but the difficulties in the way of
such an undertaking were apparently so serious, that but few could
have ventured even to hope that such an inroad on Hindoo prejudice
and superstition could have been made, as that above five hundred
females should already have been brought under instruction in
Calcutta and the vicinity alone. The ground purchased for the site of
the school and other requisite buildings, was in the centre of the
Hindoo population, and about half a mile to the north of the Church
Missionary station at Mirzapore. The foundation stone was laid by the
Lady Amherst, prayer having been offered up by the Archdeacon for the
divine blessing on the undertaking. Many natives (particularly women
and their daughters) were present, on this interesting occasion;
and the Rajah Boidinath Roy, through an interpreter, congratulated
the Lady Amherst on the success which had crowned the exertions
of her Ladyship and the Ladies of Calcutta; expressing also, his
deep sense of the gratitude which himself and others entertained
for the benefits which might be expected from the education of his
country-women.

The demise of the Bishop devolved on the Archdeacon the
administration of the affairs of the diocese during the vacancy of
the See. In writing to his brother he therefore observed:--

                                        “Calcutta, June 29, 1826.

     “We are now residing in the Episcopal house, which
     Government allows me to use, as Commissary for the See,
     and gives me the Bishop’s salary instead of my own. It is
     a new thing to me, to be consulting Burn’s Ecclesiastical
     law, Gibson, &c. There is, indeed, no power vested in the
     Bishop of Calcutta, for Government reserve the decision of
     every point to themselves; and the letters patent give no
     independent authority. Yet such a man as Bishop Heber will
     be applied to from all parts of India, on points affecting
     divorce, wills, &c., and his opinion will be received as
     law: so that such studies as I have mentioned, are not in
     vain. The love for antiquity, indeed, which some entertain,
     overlooks, I think, too much the present race of men; and
     sooner than deviate from ancient modes, would suffer them
     to pass out of life in their ignorance; but I have as yet
     discovered no ground for such rigid adherence to rules
     adapted to the Church in a settled state, and am sure the
     early Evangelists did not observe them.

     “All things here begin to assume their usual appearance
     again, except that our beloved Bishop no more occupies his
     seat among us; and that a second Escutcheon, hung up in the
     Cathedral, reminds us, that two Bishops have passed away
     from among us. My mind seems wearied with considering what
     may be destined for our Indian Church. The work of Missions
     had assumed a regular form. In the south of India, regular
     help, and enough of it, would give Christianity an almost
     established form; so many Natives profess Christianity. May
     God be gracious unto the land, and send us a man of a right
     spirit!”

By the advice of the medical men in Calcutta, the Archdeacon decided
on a journey up the river, as for as Benares and Chunar. He,
therefore, left Calcutta in the month of July 1826, visiting several
of the out-stations as he passed along. On reaching Benares, one
of the chief objects of his attention naturally was Joy Narain’s
school, in the founding of which the Archdeacon had taken so much
interest. He had now the satisfaction to find the School in excellent
order; there being in it one hundred and thirty-one boys under daily
instruction. Besides this, he found that two youths who had been
educated in the school, had been engaged ever since January last, as
assistant English-teachers in the free-school at Cawnpore, and were
giving satisfaction; and that the success of those youths in thus
obtaining a comfortable provision for themselves, had recommended
the school to the good opinion of the natives of Benares and the
neighbourhood. The Archdeacon found, also, that six other schools
had been established, in different parts of the city, in which, among
other books, the gospels were read. With reference to these schools
he observes:

     “The streets of Benares, being for the most part very
     narrow, the boys assemble in long Verandahs, and the
     passers-by see and hear all that takes place. This, though
     unfavourable for the purposes of a School, yet causes what
     the boys read to be heard by many; and sometimes a hundred
     people, and upwards, will crowd around, while the boys are
     examined, in the previous week’s Exercises: and thus their
     knowledge is diffused.”

On reaching Chunar, the Archdeacon records in a memorandum dated--

                                          “Chunar, Sep. 17, 1826.

     “It is twenty years since I reached Bengal, having
     arrived in Calcutta on Saturday, Sept. 20, 1806. I had
     appointed the 20th. Sept. as a day for calling my ways
     to remembrance; but have aforetime too much neglected
     this duty: and I fear interruption on Wednesday, the
     Anniversary of my actual entrance on life in this land.
     Many sinful causes have of late years, prevented me from
     making Memoranda of the state of my mind, as formerly, but
     I have thus deprived myself of the power of calling many
     things to mind, of which I ought deeply to repent; and am
     constrained to pray, “Cleanse me from my secret faults,”
     secret and hidden by forgetfulness from myself. Early in
     1819, I arrived at the highest emoluments in the way of
     Chaplains. In 1822, I received increased emoluments as
     a Commissary for the See; and now enjoy alone, all the
     advantages arising from the second vacancy of the See. I
     feel decidedly, and painfully, that large means have not
     been of advantage to myself, or family. My own soul has
     gradually lost much of the liveliness I once possessed
     in religion. The readiness to labour, the willingness to
     attend to the poor, the pleasure of going here and there to
     serve others, either officially or of choice, is greatly
     departed from me. Increased years, and debility, may have a
     share in this indisposition to active duties, but are far
     from being the whole cause. I am deeply conscious, also,
     that the receiving of so many [persons] from time to time
     into our house (though in many cases a mere returning of
     civilities, or rather favours previously by us received,
     and a debt of gratitude, and in almost every case appearing
     to be an exercise of hospitality) yet the numbers at table,
     consequent desultory conversation, &c. weaken the power of
     religion in me, and I seem to myself to have no strength
     in comparison of former days. I have many thoughts how far
     this company and constantly full table have had a share
     in my loss of health. I would especially call to mind, my
     dulness in secret duties, and how seldom I can ‘take hold
     on God.’ I read and kneel in devotion, but too generally
     without apprehending or appropriating any benefit. Deeply
     humiliating as this is, I yet bless my Saviour that it
     is no worse; that He has not cast me utterly from his
     presence, nor taken His Holy Spirit from me. I am conscious
     of a desire to be ‘as in days past,’ and of some endeavour
     after it. But O! I have much ground to regain; many days
     to redeem, and fewer left to work out my salvation in.
     The cross of Christ is my only hope and glory. The Lord,
     I think, knows I desire to be crucified with Christ; and
     to have all iniquity taken away. Lord, work thou in me to
     do, no less than to will! Oh! incline and enable my dear
     partner to bear in mind more and more, the subjects of our
     late conversations; that our own souls and our lovely and
     beloved children, may be improved in every grace of the
     Spirit; and that our light may yet shine before men, to the
     glory of our heavenly Father. Preserve our dear children in
     health; and O! give them spiritual healing and blessing.
     Make us more and more one in Christ Jesus. Help me to walk
     circumspectly, and to behave in present circumstances as
     becometh the gospel of Christ. O keep me from any fall,
     either in public or private; and lead me in the paths of
     righteousness _for thy name’s sake_. Other plea have I
     none: other refuge have I none. To thee, to thee alone I
     cleave. A poor feeble vine, I would cleave to thee as the
     stem; and in thy strength alone be strong. Quicken me more
     and more. Lead me from strength to strength. ‘Hold thou me
     up, so shall I be safe?’ O! forsake not the work of thine
     own hands. I am thine, save me. Amen.”

As it was at Chunar that Archdeacon Corrie commenced his missionary
labours, his account of the state of the native church there may not
be omitted. He writes:--

     “The congregation of the Hindoostanee worshippers, is
     rather on the increase. The day I was there, upwards of two
     hundred attended, of whom at least fifty were unbaptized
     natives. I conversed with some of the recent converts, who
     appear to be really sincere. Among them some are natives of
     villages in the neighbourhood, who, at first, were greatly
     opposed by their relatives; but retreating to Chunar, they
     continued to receive renewed strength and encouragement,
     by attending on the means of grace. By repeating their
     visits home at intervals, they have at length overcome
     prejudice so far, as to be heard with attention, on the
     subject of their change; and in one case, the convert (who
     is one of several brothers, Brahmins, who are the principal
     cultivators in the village) has been acknowledged by his
     family, and allowed to resume his place among them.

     “Of those natives who attend Christian worship, one whole
     family have become candidates for baptism. The first of the
     family who became impressed with the subject of religion,
     was the eldest son; about two years ago, he proposed
     himself for baptism, but his father entreated Mr. Bowley
     to delay, and he also would consider whether he should not
     join the son. Mr. Bowley on this account recommended delay
     to the son; he has continued steady, and now the father and
     mother, and some other members of the family, are resolved
     to embrace Christianity.”

On the 20th of September the Archdeacon commenced his journey back to
Calcutta. When above Rajemahl, he wrote


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                                   “Oct. 4, 1826.

     “At Benares and Chunar, our friends are greatly improved,
     and their usefulness and comforts increased by the
     ordination. There is also more of Christian union and
     love among them, and their work prospers. We call on the
     chaplains and missionaries as we pass along, and on few
     besides. We hope to reach the Berhampore river to-day. We
     have been mercifully preserved, during our journey on this
     uncertain river. By going leisurely, we have not had an
     alarm, while most persons we have met with have lost boats,
     or been some way annoyed. What lies before me I know not. I
     regret not having regularly to preach, for though ministers
     are too apt to read the Scriptures for others, I find it
     good in any way to be kept close to them.

     “I sometimes long to visit you all; but vain are such
     longings, for after all, we are only that to each other
     which God makes us. The light of His countenance alone,
     maketh whole; and I should have no comfort in leaving my
     post, without some more evident necessity than appears at
     present.”

Archdeacon Corrie arrived in Calcutta toward the end of October, and
early in the following month (Nov. 12th) was present at the opening
of a new chapel at Mirzapore, in which it was intended to have the
services of the Church of England statedly conducted in Bengalee.
Not long before Bishop Heber left Calcutta on his last visitation,
he had recommended the Church Missionary Society to make a pecuniary
grant toward the building of the chapel, and the Archdeacon had laid
the foundation-stone of it during the April of this year; the object
mainly contemplated in the erection of it being, to afford native
Christians and such natives as might be enquiring after Christianity,
an opportunity for attending the worship of God, conducted in their
own language. On this occasion, a considerable number of native
Christians were assembled within the chapel, and the doors were
thronged by crowds of Hindoos and Mahomedans, who were attracted to
the spot.

On the day following, the Archdeacon writes


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

                                        “Calcutta, Nov. 13, 1826.

     “From Sherer you will learn our own affairs, and will know
     that since he left us we have been up to Benares. We are
     rendered uncomfortable in this large house by the decaying
     state of some part of the walls; so that our personal
     comfort is not increased by the enlargement of our limits.
     And so I have found it in every advance in temporal
     circumstances; something or other connected with it, has
     always prevented increase of enjoyment. All true happiness
     dwells in the mind: and O, “What shall I render to the
     Lord,” that the peace of God, through Christ Jesus, is no
     stranger to my breast? Too often, alas, have I had reason
     to mourn my backslidings in heart, and temper, and conduct;
     but if guilt removed return, the power of the atonement
     may, also, be again and again proved.

     “I find myself more a bishop than during the former vacancy
     of this See; but here again the passings-by of some, the
     reluctance with which others apply for what they cannot do
     without, &c. might well embitter this temporary elevation
     also; but that, I trust, I have learned to forbear in some
     measure, and to forgive as I expect forgiveness; so that
     no breach has occurred with any of our body. I am bound
     both in conscience and consistency to take part in those
     measures which have, all along, given offence to some,
     whilst they are obliged also to take me with them in their
     plans. The reluctance, however, is on their part, for ‘so
     that Christ be preached, I rejoice.’

     “Now our cold season is set in, I think with reluctance, of
     returning to England. Here, I trust, I am useful in helping
     on projects for the good of many thousands; in England,
     a small parish would be all I could undertake the charge
     of. Nothing, therefore, but decided inability to remain
     in India should make me leave it. Our children, indeed,
     cannot here fully comprehend that flow of the Christian
     affections which the interest taken in all classes at home
     calls forth; and whether I shall be able to part with them
     and their mother, for three years, to visit England, I know
     not. I greatly shrink from such a separation.

     “You will have read the life of Dr. E. D. Clarke, and will
     have seen the intense desire with which, when abroad, he
     sought letters from home. Now something similar has always
     dwelt in me, though wife and children, dear as life, have
     consoled me under long silence from home. The life of
     Clarke is admirably well done. I remember the person of the
     biographer, and admired his fine delivery of a sermon at
     St. Mary’s [Cambridge]; the subject of it I have forgotten.
     But that is a long time ago, he must be getting old now,
     and I am following fast after him.”

During this month (Nov.) it was, that a circumstance occurred of
some interest, as indicative of the feeling of the native mind,
with regard to Christianity. It appeared that for want of funds,
the Committee of the Church Missionary Society in Calcutta, were
intending to withdraw their missionary from Culna, a populous town
and district on the west bank of the Hooghly, where schools had been
established. But no sooner were the principal native inhabitants of
the place (who were chiefly of the Brahmin caste) apprised of that
intention, than they presented a petition in Bengalee, to Archdeacon
Corrie, requesting that the missionary might be continued with them.
Among other things, they observed that:--

     “They acknowledged that they formerly entertained some
     slight degree of apprehension of our sacred books; but that
     in consequence of the Rev. Mr. Deerr making known to them
     these our Scriptures, not only had their fears entirely
     vanished, but they considered that these books were
     deserving of unqualified reception, and highly beneficial;
     and on this account, they considered themselves equally
     benefitted, and rejoiced, as much as a man born blind when
     he receives his sight.”

It having been decided to appoint an assistant to Mr. Bowley,
in the mission at Chunar, Mr. Landeman, who was born in India,
and well acquainted with Hindoostanee, was the person fixed
upon. Previously, however, to the departure of this gentleman
from Calcutta, a meeting was held (Dec. 15, 1826,) in the Church
Missionary Library, at Mirzapore, when Archdeacon Corrie delivered
an address to Mr. Landeman, in which he took a brief review of the
circumstances connected with the then state of missions, and the
duties arising out of them. The whole address was characterised by
that large-mindedness, singleness of heart, and tenderness, which the
Archdeacon was wont to manifest on occasions like these.[129]

As several months had now passed since the death of Bishop Heber, the
intelligence of the appointment of his successor, was daily expected
to reach Calcutta. Thus the Archdeacon writes


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                     “Calcutta, January 25, 1827.

     “It seems that the news of Bishop Heber’s death had reached
     England overland in August. ‘The Osprey,’ and ‘Barett,’
     carry official accounts. We shall now soon hear of a
     successor. The head of the Church reigneth, let the earth
     rejoice; and may we wait the result in patience. You will
     hear that Mr. Mack published, in the ‘Monthly Friend of
     India,’ an attack on our Mirzapore friends; very unkind,
     and mistaken. It has recoiled painfully on their own head;
     for Adam, who is now editor of the Bengal Chronicle, has
     taken it up, and ‘John Bull,’ has responded; and the old
     sores about Serampore premises, imperfect translations,
     and fallacious statements, have all been laid open again.
     We have kept silence, though called upon for explanations,
     &c. &c., and the storm is a little blown over.... The
     time of difficulty in our funds, (viz) the end of our
     year, has come on, and I am often much cast down in mind.
     Great temptations arise to withdraw, and leave things to
     themselves: for few come freely to take a part.... But
     is not the cause of missions the cause of Christ? I fear
     really for those, who, with the opportunities now afforded,
     can overlook that cause. It seems pure selfishness, to be
     content that these [natives] should go on in ignorance
     and sin, so we get but to heaven ourselves: and it is
     often, I doubt, fear for myself, rather than love for the
     heathen, that keeps me, in a measure, at the Missionary
     helm. But here I must stay: yet after all, if I wear away,
     some might feel it then incumbent on them to take it up
     more efficiently. Doubtless a principle is at work in this
     community, which will lead the population forward rapidly
     in knowledge and character generally; and if it be not
     rightly directed, those who neglect the present season of
     operation will suffer: but I shall not see that time, rapid
     as the progress is. New states are plainly no place for a
     person who possesses a competency, and can enjoy repose.
     India especially, is not a country a man who knows anything
     of England would _choose_ to grow old in. Here, in a
     peculiar degree, the mind is forced to look off, both from
     the Church and from the world, to the Rock, Christ.”


                             TO THE SAME.

                                                  “Feb. 22, 1827.

     “We are now more out of the way of such a bustle as we
     formerly were subject to, being, (as I think I told you)
     fixed in a nice little house at Cossipore; but I fear
     falling into the opposite extreme; for when we cease to
     do all we ought for the good of our fellow-sinners, we
     sin against the law of Christ. Surely, there is as little
     peace in retiring, selfish ease, as in bustling ambitious
     publicity. I returned a few days since, from Burdwan.
     The fields indeed, in that quarter, seems ‘white for the
     harvest,’ but both Mr. Perowne, and Mr. Deerr, are obliged
     to leave their posts, and seek change of air. Mr. Bowley
     is, also, becoming well attended to, about Chunar. Isaiah
     lx. 4, 5.[130] has been much on my mind, as applicable to
     these two spheres of Missionary labour at this time; and
     fear fills my heart, whilst it is enlarged with gratitude
     and thankfulness.

     “What may be the effect of such a commotion as seems
     approaching, on the powers that be, and how we shall
     provide for the increased calls for men and money, I know
     not. But surely He whom we serve in the gospel of His Son,
     can, and will appear for us. Rumours have reached us about
     a new Bishop, and men unknown to missionary fame, have been
     named. This seems sad: let us in patience wait the event.

     “Government has given forty rupees monthly to Chunar
     Church; and the same to Gorrikepore Church: and I am not
     without hope of getting a monthly salary for Bowley, as
     Minister on the Establishment, to a congregation of native
     Christian subjects of the Government. Yesterday was the
     Bible Society anniversary. An excellent report, drawn up
     by Mr. Goode: all our old plans are going on, sometimes
     briskly, sometimes heavily. ‘Faint, yet pursuing,’ my
     habitual motto.”

In the following month, (March 15) Archdeacon Corrie again visited
Burdwan, for the purpose of examining the schools there, and also
for making enquiry into the conduct of the head Pundit connected
with the mission, who, for some time had been carrying on a system
of double-dealing. It appeared that this Pundit had induced no
less than thirteen Brahmins (most of them school-pundits) to apply
to the Missionary at Burdwan for Christian baptism; and that, as
a preliminary step, they had accordingly been receiving daily
instruction from the missionary, and evidencing the while a good deal
of apparent sincerity and earnestness. At length however, one of
the number went to the missionary, and told him, that all that had
occurred was mere hypocrisy, and had been kept up at the instigation
of the head-Pundit; that the only object they had in view, was to
induce, if they could, the missionary to “report them as enquirers
after truth;” their notion being, that if that were but once
published, they would have the missionary in their power, as they
thought that, for consistency’s sake, he must keep up appearances,
and so be obliged to continue them in their schools, and pay them
their wages.

It has been thought desirable to mention the particulars of this
transaction, because a repetition of such or similar attempts to
deceive missionaries, may be expected to occur the more frequently,
in proportion as the profession of Christianity becomes more common
among the natives of India. It does not seem, however, that the
Christian missionary need be unduly depressed by the occurrence of
such instances of the sad depravity of the native character; for
whilst deploring the miserable condition of the deceivers themselves,
he will know that even they must have received more distinct ideas
of divine truth than they otherwise would have had. For himself, he
will learn how little confidence can be placed in any profession of
Christianity, which does not originate in a change of heart, by the
power of the Holy Ghost. Still, the Archdeacon found some encouraging
circumstances connected with the mission at Burdwan. In the report of
his visit, he relates:--

     “I had some conversation with Manick, a Brahmin who was
     baptized on the 16th of December. He had been for some time
     employed by different missionaries. I asked him, ‘What he
     had seen in Christianity which led him to embrace it?’ he
     replied, ‘In the Hindoo _poorans_ and _shasters_ there is
     no certainty: one asserts one thing, another, another; but
     here is a clear way’--‘In what way in particular?’--‘More
     especially in the way of worshipping God: in other systems
     a variety of ceremonies and rites must be observed; in this
     it is required only to pray to God alone’--‘What have you
     learned to pray for?’--‘Daily I pray for pardon of sin;
     for this I daily require.’--‘What do you understand by
     sin?’--‘Whatever is not according to God’s commands.’ He
     then, in answer, repeated briefly the substance of the Ten
     Commandments; and said that every one must labour to fulfil
     them to the utmost of his power, though no one could do it
     perfectly. A good deal more conversation followed.”

The next communication from the Archdeacon shews him to have been
still anxious respecting who might be Bishop Heber’s successor. It is
addressed


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                        “Calcutta, April 7, 1827.

     “It is now a year since Providence was pleased to withdraw
     our Bishop, and we have no tidings of a successor. We shall
     no doubt, hear in due time, but the delay of arrivals keeps
     us, also, in ignorance how matters stand with those who
     are dear to us in the bonds of nature. Since the beginning
     of January, we have continued to reside at Cossipore
     chiefly. The quiet, freedom and airiness of the situation
     is very agreeable to us; and when a Bishop arrives, I shall
     have less occasion to be so frequently in town. The ship
     that carries this, carries also Mr. Perowne and family.
     His removal just now is very painful, on account of the
     mission, as you can well judge. Deerr will reside there;
     but declines taking charge of the mission. Mr. Wilson
     will go up every month: he has been three times since you
     left us; and is very acceptable to the people; and we may
     hope the work will go on. Dear Abdool Messeeh is gone to
     his rest. A tumour somewhere in the back, of which he
     had nearly died two years ago, proved to be a carbuncle,
     brought on mortification and death. He always spoke of it
     as a boil; and his little medical knowledge proved indeed a
     fatal thing to him. But his end was according to the tenor
     of his life,--peaceful, intelligent, resigned. His last
     sensible breath was expended in singing a hymn, of the kind
     and meaning of that in Simeon’s collection, “Lord, remember
     me!”[131] An obituary is sent home, which you will no doubt
     see.[132] Mr. Reichardt will now have the principal charge
     at Mirzapore. His German order and system, is becoming
     very important to us. There are three catechists, who
     ought to be lectured once a week at least: and an account
     kept of their labours for the information of the Society.
     Mr. W. seems as if he could not do this. He will talk
     and preach from morning to night; but this particularity
     seems to him, resting in the letter; but Reichardt thinks
     otherwise, and rightly; and will labour also to render
     the whole a spiritual service. My sphere, as far as it
     appears, is about Benares. There our friends require only
     to be led; and I feel I have no power to command. I am
     expecting 300 Rupees a month [from Government] for Mr.
     Morris, as minister of Chunar. Greenwood is coming down to
     the Calcutta Grammar school, perhaps has arrived there;
     and Morris can officiate also in Hindoostanee, leaving
     Bowley free to itinerate. The Society will be relieved, in
     part, by these means, besides in some degree accredited by
     Government. Indeed, since I have been in charge, Government
     has done every thing I asked. Both Mr. H. and B. and Lord
     Combermere, have, in official matters, shewn much kindness;
     and I ask nothing else.... The expences of the mission,
     of necessity increase, as the work increases. Bowley now
     requires three bungalows in different villages, where
     influential people have embraced the gospel; and their
     neighbours desire, also, to hear more of ‘this way.’ Mirza
     Bagir, son of the traveller, Abu Talib Khan, was baptized
     last month. Mr. W. Bird was the means of his becoming
     acquainted with the Scriptures, and sent him to Bowley for
     baptism.”

In a communication addressed, in May, to the Church Missionary
Society in England, the Archdeacon enters more fully into some of
the encouraging circumstances, and prospective difficulties, then
attending missions, and which are touched upon in the letter given
above.

     “Opportunities open on every side for missionary work: but
     we cannot meet them. I agree entirely, that the prospect
     of good, and not present local patronage, should move us
     in attempting new plans; but everywhere the population
     is very large, and access to them comparatively easy.
     Government has granted to Mr. Morris at Chunar 300 rupees
     a month, in consideration of services rendered to the
     native congregation; but new openings round that station
     call for increased help. One convert baptized last year,
     has, from his fisher’s death, become heir of his property
     in land: a place of worship is required in his village;
     with a school, and a native catechist. A Zemindar, also
     lately baptized, possessing property in land in a village
     opposite to Chunar, has called for the same kind of aid: a
     bungalow is building, and a catechist will reside with him.
     Thus success in our labours entails increased expense. We
     may hope that Divine Providence will raise up aid; but at
     present, we see not how. We may indeed, hope that the days
     of indifference on the part of the British are gone by, and
     that our Bishops will continue, in succession, to uphold
     the work of evangelization; but it seems to me that the
     most trying period for all our plans may yet be to come.
     Till help be raised up among the natives, or the Government
     take up the subject, the work will be up hill: we cannot
     expect the natives to join heartily till they taste the
     good of what is brought before them; and that will not
     be, humanly speaking, till the young now educating, grow
     into active life. The Government has given a precedent
     at Chunar, of helping to afford instruction to converted
     natives; but till congregations are collected, Government,
     on the present system, cannot help directly. Fifteen or
     twenty years then must pass on this “System of Mendicancy,”
     as Bishop Heber well termed it; and as we feel it to be,
     in a way which you at home cannot well understand: _you_
     address congregations where all acknowledge the duty, and
     profess faith in God for its success--_we_ mix with those
     who scarcely acknowledge the duty or utility of attempting
     the conversion of the heathen, and have no hope of success.
     We are encouraged however, to persevere; and I trust that
     our faith will be found of a kind more precious than gold
     that perisheth, though it be tried, and sometimes as by
     fire; and that, after all, chiefly from within.”

During the summer of 1827, the Archdeacon had his equanimity somewhat
disturbed by the intelligence that the sermon which he had printed
on the death of Bishop Heber, only for circulation among his own
friends, and those of the deceased prelate, had been made public in
England. With reference to that circumstance, he writes


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

     “I am filled with concern to hear that my sermon has been
     reprinted in England. It was intended to be purely private,
     and I sent some copies to be distributed privately. It will
     be fine game for the reviewers: well, I must be content.
     No man ever less sought publicity, or was less fitted for
     the trials connected with it. I have been led from one step
     to another, and it is singular that those with whom I have
     felt most closely united, have seemed least to rejoice in
     my advancement from time to time. I have acquainted you
     with some of my experience in the school of authority; and
     it has made me desire retirement more than ever; yet how I
     shall leave this country, except ill-health compel me, I
     know not.”

It must not be omitted to mention, that with the administration
of the diocese of Calcutta, during this vacancy of the see, was
connected a more active attention to the operations of the Society
for Propagating the Gospel, and of the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge, than the Archdeacon had before felt called
upon to give. To this was added an occasional correspondence
with the English functionaries of those Societies. The following
communication addressed to the secretary of the Society for
Promoting Christian Knowledge, will not be read without interest:--

                                        “Calcutta, Sep. 15, 1827.

     “I had yesterday the honour to receive your letter of March
     1st., and beg to offer my best thanks to the venerable
     Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, for its
     acceptance of my offers of service, and to yourself for the
     obliging manner in which your communication is conveyed.
     On the subject of the Native schools, I would respectfully
     call your attention to the condition on which I proposed to
     transfer the funds to the Society for Promoting Christian
     Knowledge; viz. “if the Society for Promoting Christian
     Knowledge send out no more Missionaries.” It is with
     reference to the superintendence alone any difficulty can
     arise. My humble opinion is, that all the Societies in the
     Establishment should strive together in the good cause,
     and each support as many schools as it can, each at the
     same time supplying superintendence for its own schools.
     In this way all classes who support our Establishment
     will be induced to lend their aid; and it is agreeable to
     the constitution of human nature, and not contrary to the
     gospel, that each Society should labour to support its own
     schools whilst it rejoices in the prosperity of all. The
     superintendents being amenable to one Society, whilst the
     expenses of the schools are supplied by another, has led,
     I must say, to less exertion, and a less strict economy
     than would otherwise have been the case; and as in the case
     of the Rev. Mr. D’Mello at Howrah, some of his schools
     being supported by the Society for the Propagation of the
     Gospel, whilst others of them are supported by the Society
     for Promoting Christian Knowledge, causes a perplexity
     in our proceedings, which the public will not take the
     trouble to understand. My purpose, however, in writing now
     is not to oppose but merely to put you in possession of
     the true state of things here, and my earnest endeavours
     shall be directed in conjunction with the other friends
     of the Society here, to promote its interests and uphold
     the credit it has justly acquired by its long and most
     beneficial labours in the cause of pure and undefiled
     religion. In its English department it is unrivalled, and
     the edification afforded by its lending libraries in this
     country cannot be expressed in adequate language.

     “There is a circumstance connected with the support of
     native schools which has not been prominently brought
     forward; viz. the providing of school-books. This is a
     source of considerable expense, but without incurring it,
     schools are utterly inefficient. The school-book Society
     supplies its books to religious Societies at half-price;
     these are mostly of a mere elementary character, but
     necessary in their place. Besides these, our Diocesan
     Committee printed an edition of the discourses, miracles,
     and parables of our blessed Saviour, which has long been
     expended. The Diocesan Committee’s National schools
     have been supplied from time to time with copies both
     of the whole New Testament, and of the Gospels and Acts
     separately, by the Calcutta Auxiliary Bible Society, and
     with copies of a catechism on the evidences and leading
     doctrines of Christianity, and of Watts’ catechism, and of
     dialogues on the events related in the book of Genesis, by
     a Mr. Ellerton, from the press of the Church Missionary
     Society (all gratis,) in Bengalee. Last week at a meeting
     of the Diocesan Committee’s Society for the Propagation
     of the Gospel, I submitted to the meeting the necessity
     of printing the books most sought after by the Natives,
     after the gospels, viz. Watts’s Catechism and Ellerton’s
     dialogues, at the press of Bishop’s College. A question
     then arose, at whose expense should they be printed, the
     Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, or the Society
     for the Propagation of the Gospel? and this question is
     to be discussed next quarterly meeting. In the meantime
     the schools will be supplied from the former sources. The
     Rev. Mr. Tweddle has been resident since June last in the
     Society’s house, connected with the Russypuglah circle
     of schools, and is greatly encouraged by the attention
     which many of the adult population pay to the subject of
     Christianity. Several have professed their desire to be
     baptized, but he delays a little to prove their sincerity
     and impart further instruction. In that neighbourhood the
     desire for schools is very urgent, and all, be it observed,
     are willing, I might say desirous, that the Christian
     Scriptures should be introduced. The objection to the
     Scriptures seems chiefly among the Brahmins and Pundits,
     and they counteract, without great care on the part of the
     Missionary, the willingness at least of the people to know
     something about the Gospel. The wise and the learned among
     the Hindoos, as formerly among the Greeks, are, generally
     speaking, least disposed to attend to the things which
     belong to their peace. To the poor the gospel is preached,
     and they will receive it; and as a wealthy native lately
     observed to me respecting native female education, ‘We
     shall soon be obliged to teach our daughters letters, for
     all the poor are becoming more knowing than the rich:’ so
     the superiority of character which Christianity produces
     in the poor will force the rich to reflect on their ways.
     Till then, we shall have to struggle with scanty funds and
     poor converts; and how long that may be, God only knows,
     but in due time we “shall reap if we faint not.” If you
     will have your schools prosper, and produce the fruits
     of righteousness, pray send Missionaries; but allow me
     to say, other kind of men are wanted here, than would
     suit well enough for North America. We want, besides
     good character, activity, aptness to learn languages,
     and to impart instruction. A Missionary who should come
     here merely to impart instruction in English would only
     waste his Society’s money, disappoint the expectations of
     those who sent him, and expose the ministerial character
     to contempt. The natives can perceive, and do admire the
     disinterestedness of a man, who can be content with
     little, whilst he spends his strength in native labours;
     but a clergyman living among a few Europeans at an
     out-station, without other employment, would be liable to
     be considered as on some account or other disgraced; like
     some who have been dismissed the service of government with
     a pittance to subsist on.

     “I might perhaps have omitted to write now, as we have
     heard of the appointment of a Bishop; but I am anxious to
     afford to those who, like yourself, take an interest in the
     Church in India, information respecting the true state of
     our affairs. The reviewer of the church in India notices
     the many applications to Bishop Heber for Missionaries; and
     as an indication of improved feeling among Europeans here,
     it is a most gratifying fact; but if it should lead any to
     offer himself as a Missionary under the idea that English
     services were the chief thing required, and this idea
     should not be corrected by those who send him forth, the
     effect would be to misapply missionary-funds, and to fill
     India with a poor clergy to the saving of a rich Government.

     “Accept, I pray, my unfeigned apology for any thing I have
     written which may appear irrelevant or uncalled for. As
     far as I know myself, my only desire is to promote the
     interests of the Established Church in these lands. I shall
     not again intrude myself on your attention; and at the age
     of fifty, in a climate like this, and after twenty-one
     years service, cannot expect to be of much use to a cause,
     the prosperity of which constitutes my chief joy.”


      [119] Rev. Josiah Torriano, Vicar of
            Stansted-Mount-fitchet, Essex, formerly Chaplain to
            the E. I. C.

      [120] A school-book written in Hindoostanee, by Archdeacon
            Corrie.

      [121] A full account of this part of Hindoostan, with
            views of the scenery, is contained in “the Himalaya
            Tourist,” edited by E. Roberts.

      [122] The mountain-pass at Hurdwar, the entrance to the
            Dhoon.

      [123] Near Stamford.

      [124] General G. fell at the commencement of the Nepaul
            war, in an heroic assault on the fort of Kalunga, on
            the 30th of October 1814.

      [125] Edward A. Newton, Esq. now of Pittsfield,
            Massachusetts, U.S.

      [126] A horse soldier.

      [127] Bhurtpore was taken by storm on the 18th of January,
            1826; and peace was concluded with Ava towards the
            end of the same month.

      [128] An account of the proceedings on that sorrowful
            occasion is given in an Appendix to the Life of
            Bishop Heber.

      [129] The address is given at length in the Missionary
            Register for 1827, pp. 489, &c.

      [130] “Lift up thine eyes round about and see, all they
            gather themselves together, they come to thee; thy
            sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall
            be nursed at thy side. Then thou shalt see, and
            flow together, and thine heart shall fear, and be
            enlarged; because the abundance of the sea shall
            be converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles
            shall come unto thee.”

      [131] The following literal translation of this hymn is
            given by the Archdeacon in his memoir of Abdool:--

                Beloved Saviour, let not me
                In thy kind heart forgotten be!
                Of all that deck the field or bower,
                Thou art the sweetest, fairest flower!

                Youth’s morn has fled, old age comes on;
                But sin distracts my soul alone;
                Beloved Saviour, let not me
                In thy kind heart, forgotten be!

                           See Missionary Register, 1827, p. 453.


      [132] Ibid. p. 449-453.




                            CHAPTER XVI.

     ARRIVAL OF BISHOP JAMES--CONSECRATION OF THE BISHOP’S
       COLLEGE--DEATH OF BISHOP JAMES--VISIT TO THE UPPER PROVINCES.


Although Dr. James was consecrated Bishop of Calcutta on the 3rd
June, 1827, yet intelligence of his appointment to that See, did not
reach Calcutta till toward the close of the year. In the meanwhile
questions and difficulties had arisen, which the authority of a
Commissary was not sufficiently recognised to settle, and the letters
of the Archdeacon contain, in consequence, many expressions of
anxiety for the arrival of the Diocesan. To his brother he writes:--

     “I have sent home several folios of late about Missions
     and other matters: some private to Mr. Sherer, some to Mr.
     Bickersteth. If you have any curiosity about such matters,
     you may gratify it by referring to those sources; for I am
     weary of the subject, though it is getting every day more
     perplexing, and deserving of more attention.”

The domestic affairs of the Archdeacon were, also, a source of trial;
for the health of his children (especially that of the eldest,) had
of late been gradually suffering from the climate, until it became
necessary to arrange for sending them to England, accompanied by
their mother. In the prospect of this separation from his family, he
writes


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                                  “Nov. 12, 1827.

     “Altogether, we concluded that it was the will of God that
     they should proceed to England. Wherein we have decided
     amiss, the Lord pardon us; for I am painfully certain
     that not every movement that comes recommended by fair
     appearances, is from above, but often to prove whether we
     trust God or not.”

And after the day of actual separation had arrived the Archdeacon
writes


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

                                        “Calcutta, Dec. 14, 1827.

     “The ship which carries this, sails at the same time
     with the ‘Duke of Lancaster,’ which carries my earthly
     treasures. I try to think of my children as going to
     school, and their Mother going to take care of them. This,
     in our circumstances, is duty; but I have known no trial
     to be compared to it, except parting with Mary, when I
     went the first time to embark at Portsmouth. I cannot, in
     sober thought, bring myself to resolve on following them;
     but much may arise to render it proper, if not necessary:
     and as I made no positive resolve on leaving home about
     returning, I make none now about remaining here. When our
     infants were called away, their Mother and others in their
     stead were left. Now all are going; but there is hope, in
     every sense, of meeting again. I feel too proud, I fear, of
     my children, as most parents perhaps do. Their Mother and
     I have enjoyed as much of happiness, as earth affords; and
     remembrance of happiness only will follow her: whether ever
     to be renewed, He only knows certainly who is engaged to
     make all things work together for our good.”

The time was now approaching when the Archdeacon was to be relieved
from his duties as Commissary, for within a month of the date of the
preceding letter, he writes


                             TO HIS WIFE.

                                               “January 21, 1828.

     “The Bishop is at length arrived. He was installed
     yesterday. On Monday the report of the ‘Mary Anne’s’
     arrival reached us; on Friday [Jan. 17,] we went down,
     Messrs. Eales, Abbott, Mill, Cracraft, Prinsep (the
     younger.) We found the ship at Culpee, near to where we met
     Bishop Heber. Bishop James resembles him much in appearance
     and manner. He is evidently of a kind disposition, and for
     my own part, I have much reason to be satisfied with my
     reception.

     “I have not ascertained any of the Bishop’s plans, nor
     perhaps has he yet settled any. I mentioned the residence
     in the Upper Provinces, but he did not think the Archdeacon
     could be spared from Calcutta, on account of the frequent
     absence of the Bishop.”

The bishop, however, expressed a wish that, subject to his own
instructions, his correspondence with the Chaplains and the
Government, should be carried on by the Archdeacon, but it does not
appear that any plan to that effect was settled. As regarded himself,
the Archdeacon occupied his comparative freedom from public business,
in assisting the chaplains in their clerical duties, in finishing the
translation of the Prayer-book and the Homilies into Hindoostanee,
and in superintending a translation of the Prayer-book into Persian
by Mr. da Costa. These were all afterwards printed, either by, or by
the aid of, the Prayer-book and Homily Society. With reference to
these occupations, the Archdeacon writes


                             TO HIS WIFE.

                                                  “Feb. 12, 1828.

     “I have been officiating at Howrah, and the same sermon
     enabled me to assist Goode; so that I have not been idle,
     and am much the better for it.”

And again:--

     “I know not what C. has taken [to England] for you: I
     told him to take you a copy of the translations of the
     Common Prayer. I send three copies, by this ship, to the
     Prayer Book and Homily Society. It is found fault with, as
     Martyn’s Testament was; but I care little, as time will
     bring to light the labours I have gone through; and those
     who can improve it may.”

He adds--

     “I have been much moved by the affection of the
     Hindoostanee congregation for John Adlington. He has always
     been more disposed to suffer in silence, than to complain;
     yet after some time the Native Christians became so
     attached to him on account of his ministrations, that one
     day, on going to Church, he found a _punkah_[133] hung up
     for him. The place for the Communion table being bare, one
     begged to be allowed to place a mat on it. Another placed
     a carpet, where John stood to minister; and lately one
     came and said, he had been so comforted at the Communion,
     that he begged to be allowed to present a silver cup, and
     wished to know what shape John would have it made in.
     These are genuine expressions of Christian Native feeling,
     beyond what has appeared here; for Bowley is a great
     disciplinarian, and his people are more under awe than
     John’s flock. These facts the Hindoostanee Homilies brought
     to my mind; for the translation is now read to the people.”

It has now to be observed, that as the frequent correspondence which
the Archdeacon maintained with his wife, during the time that she
was absent from India, affords a kind of Journal of the writer’s own
feelings, and of such occurrences as passed under his notice, little
more for the present is necessary than to subjoin extracts from his
letters to her. Thus, under date of April 7th, he writes:--

     “I should tell you that Mr. Deerr had a most interesting
     occasion last week, at Culna; he has baptized five persons
     there, and another offered himself. The new Christians
     begged the baptism might take place in their quarter of
     the large spreading town. No appropriate building being
     available, Mr. Deerr had a table set under a tree, in a
     large Mango grove; the table covered with ‘a fair linen
     cloth,’ and on it a marble basin full of pure water.
     The Christians sung a hymn. About one hundred and fifty
     assembled. Mr. Deerr preached from “Hallowed be thy name.”
     All were hushed in silent attention; not a sound besides
     Mr. Deerr’s voice, except the gentle sighing of the breeze
     among the branches. Mr. Deerr hopes a good impression was
     made. A little circumstance characteristic of the people
     must be added: after the service, an old woman came up to
     Mr. Deerr full of bustle, ‘Sir,’ said she ‘one of your
     Christians owes me money, command him to pay me.’ Mr. Deerr
     said this was not a suitable time for such business. ‘Sir,’
     replied she, ‘if I am not heard in so holy an assembly,
     where shall I get justice?’”

It might seem an unkindness to his memory to keep back another
portion of the same letter, illustrative as it is (with many other
extracts that might be given) of that enduring strength of natural
affection, with which the subject of these Memoirs was so peculiarly
imbued.

     “This is a day, on several accounts, to be remembered by
     us. It is your birth-day; it is also close on my own. It is
     a day long to be remembered, too, for the sorrow we were
     visited with ten years ago; when our John was removed from
     this scene of trial, to behold his Father’s face in heaven.
     It is fit that we should call these things to remembrance;
     whilst deep humiliation becomes us, before Him who has been
     about our path all our days. We have much, also, to praise
     him for, both as it respects the past, and the present. I
     think of you now as about the Channel, approaching your
     desired haven. How the weather may have proved, and what
     the society on board ship, and whether my children have
     escaped all accidents, and how your health has been? These
     are anxious questions [to which] I must wait some months
     for an answer. To what, also, may await you in England. ‘Is
     my father yet alive,’ the ‘old man’ to whom we all owe so
     much? But why perplex myself on these accounts? I could not
     but observe yesterday, how blessed is the appointment, that
     time alleviates the feeling of loss. What agonies did we
     endure, when our John was taken away? Of Emily, I confess,
     I think less, because I knew her not as you did; but now
     it seems well, that they are safely lodged in the Lamb’s
     bosom, and it would be unkind to wish them back. O may our
     two remaining loves hear the Saviour’s voice, and in their
     early youth, know the love and kindness of His heart!”

The Archdeacon afterwards forwarded to his wife, the following
memorandum:--

                             “Calcutta, Thursday, April 10, 1828.

     “This day completes my fifty-first year. The last year
     has proved very eventful in several respects. The change
     in my circumstances by the departure to England of
     my wife and children, is great and painful beyond my
     expectation, though I anticipated painful things. The
     change in the circumstances of the Church Mission, by
     the sickness of several, and the defection of others, is
     painful to a degree. A blight seems to have come over
     my temporal prospects; and much reason is there for
     self-examination, as to why I am thus: but I need not go
     far, nor search long. To my own soul, at least, the cause
     is so obvious as to silence all complaints. If these be
     not for my individual sin, yet my sins deserve much more
     of mortification and shame. In company, vain words and
     compliances leave a sense of sin that would drive me
     to solitude: solitude cannot be improved without the
     grace of solitude. Indolence, preference of amusement to
     profit, want of delight in the Scriptures; in public and
     in private, in the pulpit and in the closet, in capacity
     to benefit myself or others, is brought more power fully
     home to me, as I advance in life. And will it ever be
     otherwise? And how can I meet death in this state? I know
     theoretically the fulness, freeness and sufficiency of the
     Saviour’s grace, but am I a partaker therein? I can think
     of my beloved family without exertion, and follow the
     intimations of my wife’s will, though she be far removed
     from the knowledge of what I do, or power of contradicting
     me; were the love of the Saviour as really in me, would it
     not operate in the same way with reference to His will? I
     know it would; and pray to be kept from self-deceiving. O,
     may I take no rest until I have the evidence of that faith
     in me which worketh by love, and overcomes the world, the
     flesh and the Devil! I resolve that thus it shall be, the
     Lord being my helper.’ Amen.”

In a subsequent letter the Archdeacon writes to his wife:--

     “I have been very busy since I last wrote. A poor creature
     who killed his wife in a fit of jealousy, sent for me last
     week; and I visited him several times before the day, and
     on the morning of his execution. My dreams for several
     nights were of prisoners and fettered captives, imploring
     help. The man was a native of Dacca, a Native christian,
     spoke English with considerable fluency, and had acquired,
     from attending on Michael Rosario, a considerable knowledge
     of Scripture: and had not his awful crime called for more
     pungent sorrow than he exhibited, he might have passed out
     of life with a good name for christian knowledge. To his
     own master he hath given an account. The day after this
     poor creature left the world, I was startled by a note from
     G. saying, ‘_his brother was indeed gone_!’ We had heard,
     of his (the aid-de-camp) illness, but had no idea he was
     in danger: but so it has come to pass. That finely-formed
     youth, who was, perhaps, too proud of the personal
     advantages God had given him, was seized with fever,
     and sunk under the effects, [of it] in a few days, aged
     twenty-one! Poor R. G. when he found his brother was in
     danger, spoke to him of the Saviour: and the dying youth,
     it seems, poured out a prayer, that, for Christ’s merits,
     he might find a place in His kingdom. ‘And this,’ says R.
     G. ‘is the only ray of light that this dark dispensation
     affords.’”

The following letter records an interesting passage in the history of
Bishop’s College, Calcutta.

                                                   “May 16, 1828.

     “Yesterday was Ascension day, and it was a ‘high day’
     at Bishop’s College. The consecration of the chapel and
     burial-ground took place. All the clergy were invited
     by advertisement. The Bishop said that he should be at
     the Ghaut,[134] opposite the College, at five o’clock in
     the morning. I left home, therefore, at four: Latham and
     Adlington went with me. We arrived first; and as the Bishop
     had said that his coach would be full, we took advantage of
     a dingy,[135] and passed over before him,--but there was
     no meeting, or any reception at the Ghaut. We mustered at
     Mill’s; and from thence proceeded to the place appointed
     for a burying-ground. M. had prepared a shepherd’s crook,
     gilt, with an ornamented staff; and this was carried before
     us, by a Native christian from Madras, with a coat of
     crimson colour, such as you know they wear on the coast.
     We then assembled in the anti-chapel of the chapel, and
     the Consecration service began; the gilded crook being
     carried before us, up to the Communion-table. The ceremony
     was then gone through, and M. preached the Sermon from
     Malachi i. 2. ‘From the rising of the sun even until the
     going down of the same, my name shall be great among the
     Gentiles, &c.’ In the conclusion, he quoted part of the
     prayer used by Bishop Middleton, on laying the first stone;
     and pointed to his monument on the wall. I was, perhaps,
     the only person present besides himself, who had taken part
     in that ceremony. Mr. Schmidt, the Old Church organist,
     had been engaged, with his three school-singing boys, and
     also a finger organ for the occasion. They chaunted ‘The
     _Venite_,’ ‘_Te Deum_,’ ‘_Jubilate_,’ and sang an Ascension
     hymn before Communion, and after Communion, an anthem from
     the eighth Psalm. The Armenian deacon was present in his
     festival robes, which were of yellow stuff, with a collar
     worn as our scarf, figured with large crosses embossed. The
     Bishop provided a breakfast in the hall, to which forty
     persons sat down.

     “May 18th. We are just returned from the Cathedral, W. and
     J. Adlington were ordained priests. Henderson preached the
     sermon. Dear John, as pale as death; but he got through
     without distress. When we commenced the Communion Service,
     and I was reading the prayers for the Church militant, the
     remembrance of the last ordinations, and of the beloved
     Bishop Heber, came so strongly upon me, that I could
     scarcely give utterance to the expression of thanks for
     those departed in the faith and fear of God our Saviour: I,
     however, got through. The whole congregation were kept the
     whole time, but only Mrs. James, and Miss O. communicated,
     besides the clergy.”

In the letters which Archdeacon Corrie wrote about this time, he
frequently mentions the failing health of Bishop James. Thus he
writes in a communication, dated

                                        “Calcutta, June 30, 1828.

     “The Bishop left this place last week, [for the Upper
     Provinces.] He continued very ill past Chinsurah. He has
     constituted me his commissary for this Archdeaconry, and
     the other Archdeacons for their’s respectively; and so
     devolved everything upon us, reserving only the power of
     interfering when he pleases; and that before any definitive
     sentence shall be passed, reference shall be made to him.
     Had the former Bishops done this, they might both, perhaps,
     have been alive still; and had not the present Bishop
     their fate before him, he might not have thought of such a
     measure; and if there be a real necessity for it, as to a
     considerable extent there is, there should be more Indian
     Bishops.”

This deputing of the administration of a portion of the diocese
to the Archdeacon, necessarily increased his occupations; yet his
correspondence intimates that he neither declined to perform ordinary
clerical duty as occasion served, nor to attend to affairs of
missions. Scarcely a month however had elapsed, ere increased illness
obliged the Bishop to return to Calcutta; and so seriously unwell
was he on reaching that place, that it was not considered advisable
for him to land. Respecting the Bishop’s state of health, Archdeacon
Corrie writes,


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                       “Calcutta, August 8, 1828.

     “Bishop James has been, and now is, at death’s door, from
     liver complaint. He was affected with it in England, and
     this climate has excited the disease, almost to death, if
     indeed he survive. He has sent in his resignation of the
     bishoprick, and is gone to New Anchorage to embark on board
     the Huntley, for Penang. He told me that his plan is, to
     stay awhile at Penang, and go from thence to Bombay, and,
     if possible, to New South Wales, and so to England. Thus we
     are again without a Bishop, although he will be nominally
     so, whilst he remains within the Company’s territories.”

With reference to missions, the Archdeacon adds:--

     “A blessing is vouchsafed to Deerr’s labours, beyond
     most. He has lately baptized eleven persons, viz. five at
     Burdwan, and six at Culna. Our Report exhibits sixty added
     to the Church; and since May 1st, fifteen more. Simon, one
     of my school-boys, has resigned a salary of eighty rupees
     a month, to engage (unsolicited) in Missionary work. Thus,
     among many discouragements the gospel grows among us.”

During the ensuing month the Archdeacon had occasion to visit some of
the stations on the river; and observes in a memorandum: dated

                                          “Fultah, Sep. 18, 1828.

     “By unexpected circumstances I find myself here, just
     twenty-two years since passing a day here on my [first]
     arrival in India. How altered for the worse is this place!
     How many changes have I seen since then! How altered in
     contrast, are my circumstances! A stranger then, wandering,
     friendless, and in my own apprehension, poor; for I
     understood in England, my salary would be three hundred
     pounds a year, and was warned that it would supply no
     superfluities. Though this was a mistake as to sterling
     amount, and there was something, I apprehend, of a pious
     fraud used, to prevent my taking the appointment from
     temporal motives;--though I have enjoyed much beyond what
     was then contemplated by friends or myself, yet I am still
     poor; though, blessed be God, neither friendless, nor
     without a certain object in life. When I say poor, I mean
     in worldly reckoning, for I am rich, in not caring for
     riches. I have long seen that they add neither to personal
     worth, nor public usefulness; except as used with a single
     eye, to the grace and goodness of God in granting them. As
     to objects, I now see what is practicable, in reference to
     the spread of the gospel in the land, which I was utterly
     ignorant of when I came here in 1806; and what reason for
     thanksgiving to God is there, that times and circumstances
     are so much more favourable now! Then all was untried and
     uncertain to a great degree; now the work of Missions is
     better understood; success has been in many instances
     granted to it, and the duty and probability of success of
     the work made, in a considerable degree, manifest.”

At the time the foregoing remarks were penned, the Church in India
had been again deprived of her chief pastor, by death; although the
intelligence of Bishop James’ decease did not reach Calcutta until
the 17th of Oct. In apprising Mrs. Corrie of that mournful event, and
of his preaching the Bishop’s funeral sermon, in the cathedral on
Sunday morning, Oct. 19, the Archdeacon writes:--

     “I took for a text Job xxx. 23, [“I know that thou wilt
     bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all
     living.”] I offered--

     “I. Some reflections on our situation in the world. As
     rational creatures, we are subject to a law which we
     have broken, in consequence of which death reigns. But a
     reprieve is proclaimed, and an offer of escape from the
     second death made by Jesus Christ.

     “II. Christianity can render the prospect of death and the
     grave, comfortable--‘a house,’ ‘a home.’

     “III. But it is by self-application that it does so; “_I
     know_ that thou wilt bring me to death.”

     “IV. And by a determination to live under the influence of
     the self-application. “_I know_,” is experimental, not mere
     theory.

     “Application, 1st. Let every instance of mortality around
     us, lead us to set our house in order; thus we shall be
     growing in capacity for the enjoyments and employments of
     heaven. Nor can our conduct, in this respect, fail to have
     a powerful influence on our general character, as members
     of society. He who thinks not of death, and of preparation
     for it, cannot set an example of religious living to
     others. He who wilfully postpones the subject, will shun
     solitude; the concerns of a future state will be, as much
     as possible, kept out of sight, and temporal considerations
     will be all in all.

     “Finally, with reference to the occasion of my appearing
     in this place to-day, to men who live not under the
     impression of death and the grave, the removal of one after
     another, of the chief pastors of the Church, will appear
     in no other light, than the removal of secular persons.
     The improvement in the religious condition of our own
     community being suspended, and the consequent influence
     such improvements might have had on the immortal interests
     of the natives, among whom we dwell, being interrupted, and
     to a considerable extent postponed,--these will not enter
     into the consideration of those, who value not Christianity
     as the only ground of a sinner’s hope; the only guide of
     his judgment and practice. How many of our countrymen
     now proceeding in an irreligious course, might, by the
     example, and the exertion of great attainments put forth
     in the service of religion, aided by the influence of high
     station, have been turned to a life of righteousness! How
     many of the youth, among our countrymen at our stations,
     exposed to every wind of temptation, with scarcely any
     controlling influence, might by such exertions, and such
     influence, have been saved from premature death, and
     rendered heirs of everlasting life! These and similar
     considerations, will not enter into the calculations of
     men who live only for the present world. True Christians,
     however, whilst they sympathise with bereaved relations and
     friends, mourn chiefly the loss of the immortal interest
     of mankind, involved in these, seemingly premature,
     bereavements. They will pray that surviving ministers may
     be enabled to redouble their diligence and zeal; as their
     work is no less, and their disadvantages greater. They
     will pray that the Lord of the harvest may send suitable
     labourers into the great and important field of labour;
     and then, whatever may be the result as to others, our
     own enjoyments will be heightened, by conscious attention
     to the duties which present circumstances call us to; and
     we shall be kept in patient continuance in well doing;
     waiting for that glory, honour, and immortality, which the
     Lord, the righteous judge, will give to all who love his
     appearing.”

By the premature death of Bishop James, the administration of the
diocese of Calcutta devolved for the second time on Archdeacon
Corrie; and it could scarcely be supposed, but that the increased
demands on his time which these changes brought with them, would
to some extent debar him from corresponding so frequently with his
friends, as he might formerly have been able to do. We find him,
therefore, now observing to his valued friend, the


                          REV. J. BUCKWORTH.

     “Among the causes of my not writing to you, one is,
     that much of what I write home is published, so that
     you know generally what I am about. This circumstance,
     also, has contributed to the difficulty I often find in
     writing to friends. The publication of my letters has
     at times occasioned me great uneasiness, chiefly on my
     own account. You cannot but know how little qualified I
     am for the public sphere unto which I have been called.
     You know, also, how little in early life I intended it;
     and, I can truly say, I have never desired it, and now
     greatly wish for the shade, my proper place. Another
     cause of my unfrequent correspondence is, the wearisome,
     inward conflict I endure, with little or no intermission.
     I travel, indeed, heavily on the heavenly way. Few, I
     think, can be burdened as I am with the body of sin and
     death. My views of the plan of salvation have been clear,
     I apprehend, from the early part of my course; and I may
     thank you, in no small degree for this; but every now and
     then, the evil of my heart breaks out, as it were, more
     inveterately than ever, and I seem ready to perish. The
     text of the first sermon you preached at Stoke, is my
     stronghold at this time, Psalm xxv. 11, “For thy name’s
     sake, O Lord, pardon my iniquity; for it is great.” It
     needs infinite mercy, and infinite merit; and _both_ are
     manifested in Christ Jesus.... These interruptions, and the
     differences which have arisen amongst the religious public
     with you, make me fear the latter day glory is not to be
     revealed so soon as once was generally apprehended. I see
     no reason to differ from Scott’s general view of Scripture
     truth; but I observe most of those at home, who contend so
     strenuously for the personal reign [of Christ,] and those
     here, who have been most dissatisfied with Missionary
     matters, are high doctrinal men. Well, the counsel of
     the Lord shall stand. His hand goes not forth even now
     in vain: where humble men persevere in setting forth the
     Saviour, as the sinner’s only hope, some are drawn to Him.
     Souls are added to the Church frequently, at almost every
     Missionary station; and the Word of God is taking root, up
     and down this part of India. Three remarkable instances
     have lately come to light, of individuals far removed
     from each other, in the upper parts of the Presidency,
     receiving incidentally the New Testament [translated,]
     taking it home, and, after understanding the blessed
     contents, calling their friends and neighbours, to hear the
     Scriptures read. In one case, the man was murdered; though
     it is thought for his wealth, rather than in a way of
     persecution. In another case, the man was obliged through
     persecution to flee from his native place, and in the
     third case, as a brother of some influence in the place,
     has taken a decided part in favour of the gospel, it is
     hoped more good will result to the neighbourhood. But the
     labourers are very, very few; and if larger salaries are
     [not] to be given to Missionaries, the number must diminish
     rather than increase. It seems as if we must labour more,
     to raise up labourers on the spot. This has always been an
     object with me; but I have had but little success. Now,
     indeed, some young men, born in this country, are coming
     forward to offer themselves for Missionary work. The
     characters of such, in a natural point of view, are almost
     always less robust than that of Englishmen. Their bodies
     are generally feebler, and the mind seems to partake of the
     same. They, however, assimilate more to the natives; seem
     to bear with their feebleness of character, and meet the
     case of the unconverted with more readiness than Englishmen
     can do, from the entirely different channel in which
     their ideas flow. It is, perhaps, never intended that the
     Indian should equal the European in energy; and we must be
     content with things as the God of nature intended them. My
     attachment to the country increases, as my acquaintance
     with the people, and, also, the language, becomes more
     familiar. I must mention, that during the last year, and
     with the help of competent assistants, I have translated
     and have printed a complete copy of the Book of Common
     Prayer. Every letter and tittle of the Prayer-Book is now
     clothed in the Hindoostanee language, and will become
     increasingly useful, as the borders of our Zion become
     enlarged.”[136]

At the beginning of November 1828, Archdeacon Corrie set out to
visit the Upper Provinces of Bengal. A Journal of his proceedings is
contained in his correspondence with his wife.[137] Thus he writes
from

                                          “Burdwan, Nov. 8, 1828.

     “I yesterday, at half past ten o’clock, went to Bogbonar:
     Candy and Hammond went with me. I felt relieved on getting
     away from Calcutta. At twelve the tide turned. I had a long
     look at our sweet Cossipore abode. The Ganges is unusually
     full this season, so that by the time I reached Serampore,
     the tide turned again. I stopped therefore at Marshman’s,
     where Mrs. J. Marshman gave me a kind welcome.

     “Bearers being procured, I set off soon after four o’clock,
     for Chinsurah; but it being Kalee-poojah, they were tipsy.
     At first, they shouted and joked; afterwards, getting
     tired, they quarrelled, and scolded, and, amidst deafening
     noise, I did not get to Herklot’s till 8 o’clock.... I
     set off for Burdwan, where I arrived before ten this
     morning. Deerr and his family are well. They have two fine
     children, a boy, and a girl, very like each other, and the
     picture of health. My mind is kept in a measure of peace.
     I have begun the book of Joshua, for travelling reading.
     I trust Joshua’s God is with me; and that I go on my way
     according to His will.

     “Sunday, 9th. This has been a day of mixed feeling. In the
     morning, I met the native Christians at family worship.
     There were twenty-two present. There are two sick, and
     three absent, making twenty-seven adults, besides children.
     A converted Brahmin read 1 Cor. xi.; and Deerr interpreted
     what observations I wished to make to them, on the Lord’s
     Supper. They seemed to understand. Something also was
     said to the women, on the honour conferred on them by the
     gospel, in restoring them to their original state, as the
     helpmeet of man, and fellow-servants of the Lord. They
     seemed to understand, and were very attentive. At ten
     o’clock, Divine service in English; about fifteen present.
     Knowing that the Bengalee worship was waiting, I did not
     prolong the English service beyond half-past eleven--got
     back to the Mission-house quarter before twelve o’clock;
     but the [Bengalee] worship did not commence till half-past.
     After a selection from the morning prayer, and a hymn,
     Deerr preached on the institution of the Lord’s Supper. I
     found that three men and two women had not been instructed
     with reference to the Sacrament, and at my desire they
     withdrew. The Lord’s Supper was then administered to ten
     men and six women; I read the prayer of consecration in
     English. I then pronounced the words in Bengalee, which
     I had written down in Roman characters; and gave the
     bread, and Deerr the wine. The whole went off, I trust,
     in an edifying manner; and, on the whole, thankfulness
     prevailed.... One end of my coming was, by this means
     to try some, and promote the edification of others. It
     is found that being baptized merely, does not prevent
     return to caste: partaking of the Lord’s Supper does. In
     consequence, one tried to evade putting the bread into
     his mouth; and another, on drinking of the cup, nodded
     slily to another, as much as to say (in my interpretation
     of his look and manner) ‘We are caught.’ This is sad: but
     some are sincere beyond all doubt; and, I may be mistaken
     in my judgment of others. Mrs. Deerr and her sister say
     of the women, that their carelessness (as it appears
     to me) is merely their shyness at the appearance of a
     stranger. One thing was very pleasing, they were almost all
     well-looking people; clean, and nicely dressed--and gave
     me the impression of being the better sort. The two I have
     mentioned as sick, are a young Brahmin and his wife. He is
     upwards of six feet high, with quite the erect, independent
     look and manner of the Brahmin--He is of the highest caste.
     One uncle is Treasurer to the Commercial Bank; and a cousin
     is the Dewan[138] of the Burdwan Rajah, at one of his
     Purgunahs.[139] Notwithstanding the favourable appearances
     here, it would be easy for an unfeeling man to break up the
     work; and render what is doing, matter of worldly scorn.
     The English around are too careless to take notice of what
     is doing; and too ignorant of the ways of the people among
     whom they dwell, to judge rightly. I have always been
     averse to exciting too much attention in them to missionary
     work, knowing how easily an ungodly man might turn it all
     into ridicule. But from my inmost soul, I rejoice even in
     these very imperfect beginnings--I am sure they are the
     beginning of better days.

     “Nov. 20th. I am now within four coss [eight miles] of
     Benares, on the Calcutta side of the Ganges, waiting for
     bearers, who ought to have been waiting for me. You are
     made acquainted with my intention of visiting the missions
     here. I wrote to you from Burdwan on the twelfth. On that
     day I went to Bancorah, and had a rainy and very tiresome
     journey on account of the broken road. I received great
     kindness from Dr. and Mrs. Clarke--Dr. C. laid my _dawk_,
     so as to admit of my resting every night at one of the
     stageing bungalows, and I am, thus far, rather refreshed
     than otherwise by the journey. I am glad to have travelled
     this road; for after having traversed in all directions
     the valley of the Ganges, I had no idea of the varied
     scenery which borders on it; on the west side, as well
     as the east. About one hundred miles from Calcutta, at
     Bancorah, the ground begins to rise: the range of hills
     we saw at Cuttack, runs on the left hand (going upwards);
     and you proceed through an uneven surface of country,
     (the scenery a good deal like the Dhoon,) ascending for a
     hundred miles more. Then a table-land commences, of nearly
     another hundred miles, but abounding in ups and downs;
     and presenting, at different points, views such as we saw
     in the Himalahs; only by no means on so grand a scale....
     At about three hundred miles from Calcutta, steep ghauts
     occur; and by degrees, the traveller gets to the plains you
     know so well.

     “Nov. 22, 1828. I arrived about twelve o’clock on the 20th
     at Secrole. On the way from a large ghaut, where I crossed
     the river, a new, tall steeple, pointing to the skies,
     attracted my eager eyes, as I approached Secrole. You
     cannot conceive what a picture the Church is now become.
     The inside enlarged by the removal of the internal wall, to
     the north, and the south; and the verandah inclosed. A new
     pulpit and reading-desk of really exquisite workmanship;
     and the front of the organ-gallery of the same; executed,
     as the whole has been, under Mr. J. P. Prinsep’s immediate
     eye. A well-proportioned stone font, placed near the west
     entrance; and the whole arranged with real taste and
     propriety. I could fill sheets with all I see and hear. I
     will only now add, that the state of this station affords a
     striking comment on the sin of despising the day of small
     things. I used to come, first to Wheatley’s back parlour,
     and meet a few writers and artillery men. We then got an
     unoccupied house, and all the station assembled; but next
     week, an alarm was taken: ‘The discontented would take
     advantage of our assembling, and fall upon us, and cut off
     all the English together.’ General M. would no more allow
     the artillery-men to attend. Thomas B. declared he would
     not again venture into such a ruinous dwelling; but strange
     to say the house is yet standing. We then assembled in
     S’s. house, every third Sunday: and after two more years,
     I ventured to circulate a proposal for building a place
     of worship, out of which, by remarkable progress as you
     know, has sprung the present commodious and really elegant
     structure. The new Missionaries are not arrived here yet;
     nor likely to be here for ten days to come.

     “Chunar, Nov. 29. To my great joy, the church is
     substantially repaired, looks better than ever, and is
     likely to stand a century. I yesterday had evening service:
     the Church was full; not less than two hundred and fifty
     people, including three officers and their families, of the
     Regulars. Last Sunday I had service twice at Secrole. P.
     was here. To-morrow I purpose having service twice here.
     This will testify of my strength; for indeed, not being, by
     my situation, called to it, I would not attempt so much, if
     I suffered from it.

     “Benares, Dec. 6th. 1828. Crauford, Wilkinson, Bowley,
     Eteson, and Frend have arrived; who, together with Proby,
     make seven Padres: and to-day Mr. Adams, of the London
     Society, and Mr. Robertson, of the same, came in. We
     commenced soon after ten o’clock, and continued till after
     two. We. discussed the signs of the times, with reference
     to the spread of the gospel among Europeans and Natives
     in India. The utility of schools where boys leave early,
     and the evidences required in adults, in order to baptism.
     Each spoke in turn, and, on the whole, order was kept; and
     all seemed gratified. It was admitted, that the progress
     of the gospel advances. Many instances were adduced of its
     gaining a hold on the native public. One man, eighteen
     coss from Allahabad, heard the gospel from a Missionary;
     and received a copy of the New Testament. He read it at
     home to his family; his neighbours also came to hear,
     till the usual effects began to appear; some siding with
     him, others opposing. Lately he came to Mr. Crauford,
     to know what he must do. A Fakeer received a gospel,
     and sent it to his village in Goruckpore district. His
     brother, a Thannadar,[140] had, also, received a gospel
     from Mr. Wilkinson. The two brothers now unite in reading
     the Gospel, and collect their neighbours to hear. The
     raising up of native teachers was also adduced: and the
     power of Divine truth, in rendering aged Hindoos active
     and industrious in spreading the knowledge of the gospel,
     instanced in several cases. Schools were admitted to be of
     incalculable value; especially as rendering the visits of
     the Missionary welcome to the adults of a village; and, it
     may be hoped, in preoccupying the mind with some degree
     of useful knowledge; though, as yet, no direct instances
     of conversion have come to light in the schools. It was
     agreed, that repentance towards God, and faith in the Lord
     Jesus Christ, should be required in candidates for baptism:
     but it was also agreed, that the fruits of these would
     appear in vast variety, and be differently judged of by
     Missionaries; so that no one should judge another in the
     admission of converts. In the evening, I preached in the
     Church from John xvii. 20, 21. “Neither pray I for these
     alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through
     their word; that they all may be one, as thou, Father, art
     in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; that
     the world may believe that thou hast sent me.”

     “December 12th. Yesterday we passed at the mission
     bungalow. Mr. E. from Ghazeepoor also joined us. So that
     there were eight padres. The forenoon was passed as the day
     before. We discussed the influence the personal character
     of a Minister is likely to have on his office; and agreed
     to some resolutions on a prayer-union, as formerly set
     on foot by Mr. Brown. This may prove a blessing to others
     also. At dinner, much discussion arose about recording
     conversations with natives on religious points; and the
     general opinion was favourable to its utility. I was asked
     to print my sermon, preached on Wednesday evening. If I see
     any prospect of usefulness, I may do so.[141]

     “Dec. 13th, 1828. This evening, I have experienced
     the greatest pleasure in Hindoostanee worship, I can
     remember ever to have done. About sun-set, I rode into
     the Bazaar, and saw a crowd; and on approaching, I found
     the missionaries with Tryloke, raised on the steps of
     a door; T. arguing with great seriousness, and perfect
     calmness of manner, and the people listening attentively.
     There had been levity, it seems, displayed by some of
     the crowd before I came; but they were then all serious;
     and T’s manner and appearance were very patriarchal. I
     was much solemnized by the scene: we then adjourned to
     the preaching-house. Charles prayed and read our Lord’s
     discourse with the woman of Samaria, with a comment,
     adding also some appropriate remarks of his own, and
     ended with prayer. Kewal Messeeh, then, commenced a hymn,
     in Hindoostanee; and a few joined him. The measure also
     was Hindoostanee. The words, and his correct manner,
     affected me much; and arrested the attention of many of
     the hearers. It was to the effect of “O Jesu, Saviour,
     God, shew mercy;” and then instanced several proofs of
     his power; and the last verse was an exhortation to trust
     in that mercy, as the only safe way of salvation. Tryloke
     then read a sermon on, “There is joy in heaven over one
     sinner that repenteth.” He read with animation, but towards
     the conclusion of his prayer, his earnestness for his
     neighbours, and especially for his own family, was very
     affecting. He seemed to wrestle for a blessing upon them.
     Doubtless these are the fruits of the Spirit; and God’s
     presence is evidently with them.

     “Sunday evening, 14th. This forenoon, a full church at
     English service. At three o’clock, p. m., Mr. Frend
     read prayers in Hindoostanee, with wonderful propriety,
     considering the short time he has been in the country.
     His pronunciation is distinct, and he would be perfectly
     understood, though some words were imperfectly expressed.
     After prayers, three adult converts from Hindooism were
     baptized by Mr. Bowley. The mother of one of them came in
     an agony to church, and also his brother; but he refused
     to forego his purpose. After church, the poor woman seemed
     more resigned, saying, ‘her son was old enough to judge for
     himself; and she did not know what might have moved him to
     the step.’ The family live near the church. Another was a
     teacher of a school; the third was brought to the faith of
     Christ by means of an Indigo planter, and sent hither for
     baptism. He gave his mala[142] to Mr. Eteson, saying, it
     was once his treasure, ‘but now,’ said he, ‘these are my
     treasures;’ referring to a Hindoostanee Prayer-book and
     New Testament he had under his arm. After the baptisms,
     Mr. Wilkinson preached in Hindoostanee, on the baptism
     of the Eunuch. I could not but be very thankful for the
     means of instruction thus supplied. I felt how much better
     the people of this place were off, in respect of means of
     grace, than when I resided here; and, I think, I was, from
     my heart, content to sink in the scale; and that these
     devoted servants of Christ should become in every way more
     useful, and as ministers, more honourable; and may an
     abundant blessing follow the instructions afforded here
     this day!”

     “Dec. 25th, 1828. This day has been a day of thanksgiving.
     At church, I preached, and administered the Sacrament of
     the Supper, with Proby. Thirty-eight attended the Lord’s
     Supper, of the English congregation; and I found Mr.
     Eteson had above twenty communicants, at the Hindoostanee
     Chapel. P. is, at times, all gloom, as if this were a day
     of vengeance for Benares; and the people were filling up
     their measure of wrath. I maintain, that he would be of an
     opposite opinion, could he have seen the place twenty-three
     years ago. I am much importuned to go to Goruckpore; and
     propose leaving this to-morrow night, by _dawk_, for
     that quarter. I go only five stages by bearers; and then
     expect to find a buggy the rest of the way. You will
     conclude, that at times, I feel anxious about who may be
     the next Bishop; and you will, I know, give me the earliest
     intelligence you can. The two young men last arrived
     promise well; and at times, I am ready to think that means
     for forwarding the kingdom of Christ are rising up around,
     which may render my services of little consequence, and
     then, I should think, I had better withdraw. But who shall
     reckon on to-morrow? May we labour for the things which are
     eternal; and whether in India or England, we shall have the
     presence of the Saviour to support and comfort us!

     “Goruckpore, Dec. 29, 1828. On Sunday I preached twice for
     Mr. E. In the morning, the singers sang a psalm-tune I do
     not recollect to have heard since I left Colsterworth. It
     reminded me strongly of early days.... The band-master was
     clerk: and is a man of real piety, and more than common
     propriety of manners. The singing is well conducted there.
     A new church is building, on a plan supplied by Bishop
     Heber; but the drain of money, caused by the Burmese war,
     has caused all matters which require money, to go on very
     slowly, ever since. At nine o’clock in the evening, I left
     Mr. E. and came on in a palanquin towards this place.
     Through the kindness of Mr. Bird and Mr. Wilkinson, I had
     five relays of horses, and a buggy waiting on the road: so
     by seven in the morning I mounted the gig. On the bank of
     the Ganges, I found Mr. Bird in a tent, waiting for me,
     with breakfast ready. We made a comfortable meal, and he
     afterwards drove me through a country, finely cultivated,
     to Goruckpore; where we arrived just after sun-set.
     This district has been reclaimed from the forest nearly,
     since the English gained possession; and a quantity of
     the forest-trees remain, in scattered clumps, which give
     a rich appearance to the country. It is in sight, too, of
     the perpetual snows; and is seldom scorched as the plain of
     the Ganges is. R. B. has a house of the best style of the
     Moffusil,[143] surrounded with quite a park.

     “Tuesday, 30th. After breakfast, I set out to explore the
     mission-premises here; and was much gratified indeed with
     the general appearance. First, came the Christian houses,
     situated close to the town; with a field of about three
     acres in cultivation before them, towards the high road.
     On the north side of this field stands the seminary, as
     it is called. A pucka[144] building, with two lower rooms
     at the north end; and over them one sleeping room. The
     whole verandahed all round, with tasty pillars, in front
     of the dwelling part. This forms a most comfortable abode
     for a single man. In this will dwell a country lad, named
     Raphael, whom I brought up from Calcutta. He seems to have
     received religious benefit from Crauford’s Friday evening
     catechizing, at the old Church room; and is mentioned in
     the last Report of the Church Missionary Committee, as a
     missionary student. He came over here with Wilkinson, from
     Benares; and you will be glad to hear that both W. and R.
     B. are favourably impressed with what they have as yet seen
     of him. Next to the seminary, eastward, across the road,
     is the Church, at present levelled with the ground. The
     last year here was unusually rainy. The earth became so
     saturated with rain, that all the wells were running over;
     and the sandy soil becoming thus impregnated with moisture,
     the foundations of the Church gave way. R. B. with his
     usual decision, pulled it all down; and is now employed
     in rebuilding it on piles, and on a broader foundation;
     intending, also, a less ponderous roof. Behind the Church,
     eastward, is the parsonage; a very pretty and commodious
     building. It consists of a lower room to the west, and one
     of similar dimensions to the east; with two rooms on each
     side; a verandah all round, and corner rooms to each side:
     a complete Indian dwelling, outhouses in abundance; and a
     fine garden, kept up by the prisoners sentenced to hard
     labour. The whole extent of ground is about twelve acres;
     which is made over to the Mission, including the site of
     the Church. I must not forget to mention a nice building,
     nearly finished, intended for christian girls: and called,
     in joke, ‘the nursery.’ Sarah Bowley was to have come here,
     to take charge of it, but this plan is suspended, owing to
     the departure of Dr. and Mrs. Clarke. Perhaps Bowley and
     his daughter will come here, for the hot season; and then
     the plan will proceed. All these temporal advantages, the
     Mission owes to Mr. B; and it is a matter of thankfulness
     that he has notice of being appointed Commissioner here,
     on the new system; and will now, (if spared) in all
     probability, continue here several years.

     “You will now have some idea of the external state of
     this place; but cannot adequately conceive of the beauty
     of the situation of this part of India. But now for the
     better part. On my going into the Mission-house, all the
     Christians collected, old and young; and the room was
     filled. I could not speak to them all at once, and so
     proposed a hymn. We sang the thirty-fourth of Bowley’s
     Hindoostanee translation, and then some from Betteah were
     introduced, the children of persons who had received copies
     of the Gospels from me at Chunar, and which are kept now as
     relics. Raphael, one of my school-boys, is major-domo of
     the christian settlement; and shewed it to me with great
     glee. The aged Zemindar, and several converts from Islam,
     conversed for some time; and two or three Hindoo devotees
     sat ‘clothed’ beside us, ‘and in their right mind.’ On
     coming away, I saw one of these talking with great
     earnestness to a fat Fakeer, covered with ashes; he seemed
     to be repeating Scripture to him, but I did not stay to
     hear, lest I should put an end to the discourse.

     “Wednesday, 31st. This morning at eight o’clock, I
     assembled with the Christians at morning prayer in the
     school-room. Forty-three were present; of whom about ten or
     twelve were boys, of ten or twelve years of age or under;
     the remainder adults, male and female. The morning Psalms
     were read, in alternate verses, in Hindoostanee. The third
     of St. Matthew was then read, and the latter part commented
     on by Mr. W.; a hymn was first sung, I should have said,
     and all concluded with prayer, by Mr. W. Thus the word of
     God grows and increases. About two, p. m. I went again to
     the Mission-house, and read the second Homily, and part
     of the third, with the Zemindar, and an intelligent young
     convert from Islam and a few others. They entered into
     the subject earnestly, and much conversation arose out of
     different parts of the reading.

     “January 1st. 1829. I, this morning, went on the top of the
     house before sun-rise, and had a sight of a peak of the
     snowy mountains. It brought strongly to my mind Masoree
     Tabea, and the happy days we passed there in 1825: my heart
     yearned after our sweet children, and I tried to pray for
     them, that this may prove a happy year to them, and that
     through all eternity we may rejoice together. We had a
     New-year’s day service, with the native Christians; it was
     to me, and I believe to several of them, an interesting
     service; I spoke to them on life as a journey. I am almost
     constantly with you in spirit; and associate you in all my
     poor prayers, for mercy, and blessing. To-day news have
     arrived here of various movements, seemingly propitious.
     May divine grace accompany them to those concerned; and
     they cannot fail to prove so!

     “17th. I have told you of all the people I met with, up to
     Monghyr. On the 14th, I got to Boglipore, and walked to the
     cantonments of His Majesty’s 3rd Regiment, now stationed
     there. They are on the Calcutta side of the old station,
     and the distance is considerable. I was rather heated,
     and could only leave word with a serjeant, that I would
     come up next morning to the school-house. After a while,
     the school-master came to my boat, a pious young man who
     received the knowledge of the truth under a Chaplain in New
     South Wales. He has been the means of drawing eight others
     to join in a religious society, and seems an estimable
     character. Next morning, at nine o’clock, I went up and
     found the commanding officer, Colonel C., at the mess-room;
     and five children with parents and sponsors assembled. The
     Colonel went with me to the school, where I catechised
     the Protestant children, and gave each a little book. He
     then went with me to the hospital, where I read prayers;
     and exhorted the convalescent, about twenty or thirty
     in number. The Colonel then took me, in his gig, to his
     bungalow, and introduced me to his wife, and a grown-up
     daughter. There was a little son also, who seemed greatly
     pleased with a book I gave him. I was much pressed to stay
     and dine with the mess, but I had accomplished what seemed
     in my power, and declined the civility. I gave a good many
     of the tracts and religious books I mentioned, as having
     been brought out for me by Mr. Eteson, to the schoolmaster
     for distribution.

     “Jan. 22nd. I am near Cutwa. It had been my intention to go
     over to Maldah, from below Chandree; but unexpectedly this
     river is still open; and the Manjee[145] said, it would
     make five days difference, as to the length of the journey;
     beside the delay of going over to Maldah: and I have been
     long enough absent from Calcutta, at this time. I hear,
     also, that the Governor General is about Maldah, shooting;
     so that I should have had little comfort in the visit. At
     Berhampore, I called on the D’s, Mr. Hill, and the new
     Chaplain, Mr. Wintle; but remained only about three hours:
     there seemed nothing to detain me. I am expecting to see
     the V’s., this evening, or early to-morrow, at Krishnagur,
     to call at Culna, and perhaps meet Mr. Deerr, and inspect
     the schools.... My recreation is drawing to a close, for
     the present, for Calcutta has never been a residence of
     my choice. On the whole, my journey has yielded all the
     pleasure I expected. I have kept free from colds, and
     have reaped all the benefit of the change and variety....
     I have met with kindness everywhere; and seen much of a
     religious nature, to encourage. From long acquaintance
     with the natives, I have also derived amusement, beyond
     any other time, from observing their innocent sports. But
     alas! their language, even when in sport, is sadly corrupt.
     However, I see more and more, how little those who do
     not mix familiarly with them can know them. Their whole
     conduct may be construed either seriously, or as in joke,
     if necessity oblige them to conceal their real meaning.
     Christian knowledge is doubtless gaining ground, wherever
     Missionaries dwell. At Monghyr, Mr. M. told me that many
     natives now come to hear the word regularly. Mr. Hill, at
     Berhampore, told me the same. The interruption they used
     to meet with seldom occurs; and many listen attentively
     to the end of a discourse, instead of going out and in,
     as formerly. Still, it is but ‘the day of small things;’
     and, respecting the general population, but a very few
     come under the ‘joyful sound.’--I heard, at Monghyr,
     of a wealthy farmer, as you would say in England, near
     Sheergotty, who received a Hindoostanee New Testament, from
     Mr. Bowley, in one of his journies back from Calcutta. The
     man read it to his neighbours also; and other Missionaries,
     who have since met with him, were delighted with the love
     he shewed for the truth. This man has lately been murdered;
     it is thought, on account of valuable ornaments he wore;
     but the particulars are not known. These incidental
     occurrences shew the value of itinerant labourers.”


      [133] A board suspended from the ceiling, and having ropes
            attached by which to swing it to and fro, for the
            purpose of cooling the room.

      [134] Landing-place.

      [135] A small kind of boat.

      [136] It may here be mentioned that the Creed of St.
            Athanasius, as translated in this Prayer-book, so
            attracted the attention of the learned Mahomedans,
            and the demand to possess it became consequently so
            great, that Archdeacon Corrie was induced to have
            several hundred copies of it struck off for separate
            circulation. One of those persons, on applying for a
            copy of the Creed, observed, “Now we know what you
            Christians believe.” The Archdeacon on relating this
            circumstance stated, also, that nothing could exceed
            the bitter enmity against the doctrine of Christ,
            which the exposition of divine truth contained in
            that Creed, seemed to stir up in the Mahomedan heart.

      [137] Many particulars connected with this Journey, and
            not contained in the following pages, may be seen in
            the Missionary Register for 1829.

      [138] Chief Minister or agent.

      [139] A large division or district of land.

      [140] A kind of police-officer.

      [141] It does not appear that the Sermon was ever printed.

      [142] Rosary or string of beads.

      [143] Out-stations.

      [144] Brick.

      [145] Steersman.




                            CHAPTER XVII.

     GOVERNMENT RETRENCHMENTS--PLAN FOR A COLLEGE--DEATH OF MR.
       THOMASON--ABOLITION OF SUTTEE--ARRIVAL OF BISHOP TURNER.


It was on the 30th of January, 1829, that the Archdeacon arrived at
Calcutta from his visitation of the Upper Provinces. He found some of
his friends preparing to leave India; and others suffering from the
effects of climate. Among the latter was Mr. Thomason, who had been
returned to India only a few months, but whose health had altogether
given way. With reference to such changes as were thus going on
around him, the Archdeacon writes


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                                 “March 10, 1829.

     “I cannot at present see it my duty to prepare for leaving
     India. It is not, as you justly say, a country to grow old
     in, but my health is wonderfully renewed, and the work of
     missions, instead of becoming plainer, is daily becoming
     more difficult. It would appear that ease makes men more
     fastidious, yet the work does prosper. Piety does, however,
     appear now to be more requisite here than in New Zealand,
     as you well know that men of mere worldly principles can
     scarcely bring themselves to believe, that the natives of
     this country need conversion. A person of these principles
     going forth as a Missionary, therefore sits quietly down
     among the people, and if he superintend a school or two,
     thinks he does all that is practicable.

     “Conjecture tires as to who may be our next Bishop, but I
     think we might have learned from the past, to ‘cease from
     man.’”

Then with reference to the measures which had, about that time,
been adopted, for the purpose of revising and curtailing the whole
expenditure of the three Presidencies of India, the Archdeacon adds:--

     “All here are in amazement at the turning of all things
     upside down, in the service; and know not what to expect.
     It is concluded that something is in view with reference
     to the renewal of the charter,--but what, no one can
     conjecture.

     “As yet, we see not in ‘the powers that be’ anything more
     favourable to true religion, than formerly. Education is
     encouraged, as it has been for some years past; but, as
     formerly, entirely from private funds. No hope of aid from
     government is held out. The only favourable symptom that I
     am aware of, is, that Mr. W. B. is to become a member of
     the Committee of Public Education. He has had experience of
     the ease with which Christian instruction can be imparted;
     and will do all he can to improve the present system.”

Soon after the date of this letter, the Archdeacon again alludes to
the state of public affairs in a letter


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

     “At present there is great uneasiness throughout every part
     of the community. The whole system of civil administration
     in the upper branches, is changed, and the most lucrative
     appointments cut off. The same duties are performed by the
     same men in another manner, and on reduced emoluments. The
     army has been reduced two companies in each Regiment, by
     which a crowd of young men are made supernumeraries; and
     the pay at some places is reduced, which it is thought
     is only a prelude to its being reduced generally. Among
     the natives great alarm has been occasioned by an enquiry
     set on foot respecting all _lakhrage_ lands, not hitherto
     rated in the Government books. These consist of religious
     endowments and lands granted by former Governments for
     services done to the state. These, in some cases, have
     been resumed, and no holder of such estate is certain of
     retaining it. In the public offices many clerks have been
     dismissed, and by the civil arrangements above alluded
     to, very many are thrown out of employment. So that no
     one of any class or condition is satisfied; and some
     parts of the army are all but in a state of mutiny. The
     most sober-minded I know of, think the making all these
     changes together, injudicious. The necessity of economy is
     the reason assigned for all this, but surely the splendid
     entertainments given by the Court of Directors in London,
     look not much like a necessity for taking from the mere
     subsistence of subaltern officers. I try to be silent and
     to wait the end. Certainly the personal character of our
     rulers seemed to [promise] us brighter prospects as to
     the encouragement to be afforded to Christian plans and
     improvement. But no--they give liberally of their own
     substance to Societies, but not a rupee, or a smile of
     approbation must come from Government; so that the “system
     of Mendicancy” must continue some time longer.”

With reference to the same subject, the Archdeacon writes:--


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                                  “Aug. 16, 1829.

     “A thirst for learning English has discovered itself all
     over the country; which no doubt, looks hopefully, as to
     improvement. It is dispiriting, however, that we have so
     few Missionaries, and next, that the Government shut their
     eyes more obstinately than ever against every thing in the
     shape of Christian knowledge. In answer to an application
     for aid to a school at Meerut, in which Mahomedans, Hindoos
     and Christians are taught together, it was said, that
     it would not be right to appropriate funds intended for
     native education to instruct children of Europeans, i. e.
     Indo-Britons. And I have been applied to for an opinion
     about the removal of the Chaplain from Howrah, it not being
     right, Government thinks, to supply from funds raised from
     natives, a religious establishment for Europeans, except
     for the Company’s servants. I am endeavouring, with no
     little anxiety, you will suppose, to combat this view of
     things, and have been much assisted in the matter by W. B.
     who is a near neighbour. I wish you were nearer London,
     to speak a word to some of your old friends, now in the
     Direction, to get a distinct recognition of the right of
     native Christians, including country-born, to a share in
     the public measures for the improvement of the country.
     I have written to P. and shall write to Mr. A. to ask
     it, as he may, of Lord E. and the Board of Control. I am
     hopeless, yet the abstract right of the claim might gain
     a hearing where personal interest is out of the way; and
     the Government has always acted on the principle that the
     country-born should share.”

Yet this settled determination on the part of the Indian Government,
to leave Christianity and Christian education to shift for
themselves, had not the effect of slackening Archdeacon Corrie’s
exertions to secure by private aid, some of those advantages for the
Christian population, which he had solicited in vain from public
resources. Two months anterior to the date of the foregoing letter,
he had put into circulation in Calcutta, the outline of a plan
for establishing in that city an Institution, which should aim at
promoting the interests of true religion in connection with large and
liberal education.

In forwarding a copy of this outline, he writes:--


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

                                      “Calcutta, August 19, 1829.

     “By the enclosed, you will see what has been occupying
     me, in part, for some time. The class of Indo-Britons,
     or East-Indians, as they begin to call themselves, is
     increasing very fast. Besides the number in charity
     schools, there are not less than five hundred in boarding
     schools, in this place. Not above one hundred perhaps can
     pay, so as to remunerate the masters; yet they are all
     descendants of gentlemen. Hitherto they have generally
     been idle, and dissipated; possessing all the vices of
     both father and mother, without any of the redeeming
     points in either. You will conclude there have always been
     exceptions. But, within these fifteen years, a change
     has been going on; and a great improvement is becoming
     visible among that class. Yet they have hitherto had no
     bond of union, and stand separate from all established
     order. The Dissenters, being more on a level with them
     in most respects, and really exerting themselves for the
     improvement of this class, would gain the majority of
     them ere long. I hope, if we can bring the plan of the
     Prospectus to bear, we may succeed in establishing a
     connecting link between the Church of England, and these
     really Colonists. The lower branch, or a Grammar-school,
     is first to be attempted; about twenty thousand rupees are
     set down, in shares and donations; and with a like sum in
     addition, we shall be able to make a beginning. A master
     will be wanted from England. We could, I think give him
     £500 a year, and a house, worth here on the lowest scale
     £250 more; with a per-centage on any profits that might
     arise.... We have a good deal to contend with: first, our
     Governor-general, to my great dismay, has all but avowed
     that the improvement of the Christian part of the Indian
     community is no part of his duty. Next, a most extensive
     forgery of Government-bonds has been discovered. Three
     hundred thousand pounds, it is said, is not the whole
     extent of it. Many who deal in the funds, find they have
     bought forged bonds; consequently it is not a good time for
     subscriptions. And last, not least, Liberalism prevails
     here too, as in England; and will neither do good itself,
     nor agree to any scheme proposed by others, if religion be
     included. But we must do what we can. O! my heart sickens
     at the proceedings of Parliament; and I feel resigned, at
     times, to give my bones to India, England being no longer
     the land of attraction it was. Another discouragement
     to the scheme inclosed is, that it has been declared to
     be opposed to Bishop’s College; whereas it will prove a
     powerful auxiliary, by supplying youths whose abilities and
     dispositions have been tried as students, and candidates
     for Missionary work. I am just now, also, much occupied
     with a correspondence with Government, on the subject of
     supplying religious instruction to Christians not in the
     immediate service of Government. I hold that they ought to
     be supplied. The correspondence, I expect, will be referred
     home. But who cares for religion in high places at home?
     and what can the Archbishop do, his office being so little
     set by?”

It remains now to subjoin an outline of the Archdeacon’s views,
respecting such a liberal education on Christian principles as, in
his judgment, was calculated to meet the anomalies and exigencies of
the several classes of British subjects in our vast Eastern empire.
He proposed, then,

     “That a College should be founded in Calcutta, in which,
     whilst the various branches of Literature and Science
     should be made the subjects of instruction, an essential
     part of the system should be, to imbue the minds of the
     youths with a knowledge of the Doctrines and Duties of
     Christianity.

     “That this College should be, in every way, conformable to
     the United Church of England and Ireland. But as there are
     also many in this land who are not members of that Church,
     and who are at present completely excluded from the means
     of bestowing upon their children a liberal education, it
     was further proposed that persons of all persuasions should
     be permitted to attend the various classes in the projected
     seminary, under certain restrictions, but without such
     restraints as should go to interfere with their religious
     opinions.

     “That in conducting the Institution, a liberal and enlarged
     course of education should be pursued, adapted to the
     respective attainments of the Students; the College to be
     divided into two departments,--a higher department for the
     elder, and a lower department for the younger students.

     “The system to comprise Religious and Moral instruction,
     Classical learning, History, Modern Languages,
     Mathematics, Natural Philosophy, Medicine and Surgery,
     Chemistry, Jurisprudence, and other branches, as time and
     circumstances might admit of and require.

     “The College to be open to the sons of native Gentlemen,
     as well as to all denominations of Christians; and to be
     divided into two sections, viz., one consisting of those
     who should conform in all respects with the regulations
     of the Institution, to be designated ‘Members;’ the other
     section to consist of those only, who might attend the
     classes for the purpose of receiving instruction.

     “The advantages of the Institution to be available for
     all Students, with the exception of some theological
     privileges, which unavoidably would have to be restricted
     to the ‘Members’ of the College: no student, not being a
     Member of the College, to be required to comply with any
     religious form [of worship], provided he submitted to the
     general system of education, pursued within its walls.

     “The benefit of attending any course of Lectures in the
     higher branches to be afforded to all who might be disposed
     to avail themselves of it, under the preceding and such
     other regulations as might be specified.

     “All students entering as ‘Members,’ of the College, to be
     required to conform in every respect, to the Doctrines,
     Usages and Forms of the United Church of England and
     Ireland; and Members of the College only to be received as
     resident students within its walls, and these to be subject
     to such rules of discipline, and to such an extent, as may
     thereafter be agreed and determined upon.”

The great principle however, which it was purposed to embody in
the projected College was, that whilst in a Christian community
every system of general education ought to comprise instruction in
the doctrines and duties of Christianity; and whilst, in the then
existing state of society in India, to compel all students to comply
with the forms of Christian worship, would be to defeat the object
which it was conceived the Institution would effect, yet that in all
education the WORD OF GOD ought to form an indispensable element. It
was maintained by the Archdeacon that without this, the acquisition
of other branches of knowledge could neither be conducive to the
happiness of the individual, nor to the welfare of the state. It was,
intended, also, that the College should expressly have in view the
upholding of the ancient Institutions of England, and the inculcation
of those doctrines and that discipline which were professedly held
and taught by the Established Church. It was proposed, therefore,
that none should be “members” of the College, who were not also
members of the Church of England; and that these should, as a
matter of course, be required to be present at Divine Service to be
performed within the walls of the College, and to be instructed as
Church-of-England-men.

It was whilst matters of such public importance engaged the attention
of Archdeacon Corrie, that intelligence of the death of Mr. Thomason
reached Calcutta. In noting that event the Archdeacon writes to Mr.
Sherer:--

     “You will have heard of the Church’s loss in the death
     of Mr. Thomason. A blank is made not likely to be soon
     filled up. I preached a funeral Sermon last Sunday morning,
     (August 9), in his old pulpit, and did him what honour I
     could, but far beneath his worth.”

The Archdeacon had, also, now to encounter a bereavement which more
nearly touched his natural affections. His father had died during the
spring of 1829; and therefore, he writes


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                                “August 27, 1829.

     “Yours of the 6th of May, with Henry’s note enclosed,
     came to hand yesterday afternoon. The black seal led me
     to forebode the event which the contents of the letter
     confirmed. His great age made such an event probable, and
     to be looked for; and with the hope that we have that death
     to him was gain, we cannot complain, much less ‘sorrow as
     those who have no hope.’ A great, great blank is, however,
     occasioned by my beloved Father’s removal; and soon the
     elder branches of his family would be strangers to those
     around them on earth, but for the dear charges given to
     themselves.”

From his Journal (now so rarely kept) some insight into the
Archdeacon’s private communings is obtained in the following
memoranda:--

                                                  “Sep. 11, 1829.

     “If spared to the 20th, I shall have been twenty-three
     years complete in India. Many things of late combine to
     weigh down my spirits. The defection of Missionaries,
     and now of L. who though unwell, would not wish to stay
     if well. The inclination of Government, to withhold all
     aid from christian ministrations, even among Christians:
     beginning, at once, by withdrawing the Chaplain from
     Howrah. The death of my father;--and anxiety for my family,
     constitute a load of care. I am not constitutionally prone
     to despond; but neither can I throw off impressions as
     some can. The care therefore, of answering government,
     and providing for Howrah ... whilst they have rendered me
     anxious, have, also, stirred me up to exertion. Yesterday
     in conversation with the Governor-general, I was enabled
     to speak freely, yet respectfully I hope, on the duties of
     Missionaries. I pointed out to him the different line of
     study, and reflection on Missionary callings, required from
     that of a Minister to instruct Christians; and the wrong
     done to the English societies and the English public, by
     employing Missionaries otherwise than as Missionaries: and
     appealed to him, that, notwithstanding the duty due to this
     Government, whether as an English gentleman he could wish
     the mother country to be burdened with the charge of the
     religious instruction of India? That, I was quite certain,
     that by providing for the support of Christian instruction,
     as occasions arose, (on a moderate scale) that this
     Government need not be burdened; and, at the same time,
     England would be relieved. He said with regard to Howrah,
     he would consider more of the matter.”


                                                  “Sep. 19, 1829.

     “In conversation with Sir Charles Grey,[146] on the
     subjects lately started by Government, respecting the
     duty, or otherwise, of applying revenues, derived from the
     natives of this country to the support of religious worship
     among Christian settlers, he said, the anomaly ought not to
     be applied to that one subject alone: it commenced in our
     taking upon us to govern the country at all. A people of
     strange tongue, and customs every way foreign to theirs,
     come, and sit down among the Hindoos, and make them pay
     for administering laws, to which they had been unused, and
     introduce usages abhorrent to their modes of thinking.
     Now, if we can do this in one respect, why not in another?
     And if in mere political and prudential matters, for their
     good, as we say, why not in respect to religion, which we
     hold to be the greatest of all good?”

It will be seen that the same important subject had been adverted to,
in a letter, which in the prospect of the renewal of the East India
Company’s charter, the Archdeacon had recently addressed


                   TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.

     “There are some circumstances in the state of
     ecclesiastical affairs here, which it seems desirable your
     Grace should be acquainted with before the renewal of the
     East India Company’s Charter, with a view to their being
     put into some way of order at least, and settled by an
     acknowledged rule.

     “1. It is not distinctly understood how the law of marriage
     stands in this country. It is acknowledged that the
     marriage acts have not had, and have not now, any force
     in this country; but Bishop Middleton held that this See,
     being attached to the Province of Canterbury by Act of
     Parliament or the Letters Patent, has become subject to the
     ecclesiastical law of England, which requires marriages to
     be celebrated by a Clergyman, and within Canonical hours.
     And this rule was generally adhered to till the late Bishop
     consented to an order of Government sanctioning marriages
     by public Functionaries, both civil and military; and
     directing them to be registered by the Registrar of the
     Archdeaconry: and thus matters stand at present. Some
     of our first lawyers say, that marriage by a layman is
     to all purposes good; others say, only to some purposes;
     that it binds the parties, but confers no right of dower
     on the widow, or of inheritance on the offspring. It is of
     great importance that some declaration on the subject, by
     authority, should be set forth. I know that a good deal
     of anxiety is at times experienced by some who have been
     married by laymen; and several sons of men of rank and
     property are among the servants of this Government, who
     may eventually be deeply affected, should any irregularity
     be discovered in the present system. Up to March 1828, the
     Chaplains were on all occasions applied to, to celebrate
     marriages, and they had often long journeys to make for
     this purpose; but now, unless they be near at hand, many
     do not care to send for them, whilst the sanction of the
     Government makes no difference whatever in the law of the
     case. An easy remedy would be, the keeping the number of
     Chaplains always full, taking measures that Chaplains
     retiring should be obliged to an early determination on the
     point soon after their return to England, and not, as at
     present, be allowed to linger on for years, keeping their
     places unsupplied. An increase of Chaplains is, I fear,
     out of the question; yet would it not be, if but a common
     regard for the credit of our religion and the religious
     welfare of Christian subjects existed where it should.
     In many of the districts of this Presidency, especially
     in those most favourable to the growth of indigo and
     sugar, and in some degree in all of them, many Christian
     settlers have fixed themselves. A District, your Grace
     will know, is as large as an English county; and if a
     Chaplain were appointed at the chief station, where most
     of the servants of Government reside, and where there are
     generally from five to fifteen families, they would be at
     hand to celebrate Christian rites in the District; and on
     Festivals, part of the Christians resident in the District
     would resort for divine service to the head station. If
     want of funds prevented such appointments, the necessity
     must be patiently submitted to, but from the ground-rent of
     the whole country, surely the East India Company ought to
     make some reserve for religious purposes beyond the mere
     wants of the military. But this is connected with another
     point to which I would now entreat your Grace’s attention.

     “2. Hitherto it was thought here, that only the fewness
     of the Christian portion of the inhabitants prevented
     appropriations being made from the resources of Government
     for their religious instruction: but it is now answered,
     that Christians have no claim on Government for religious
     instruction, and that in fact it would not be right to
     appropriate revenue derived from the natives of this
     country, to the supplying of Chaplains to Christian
     settlers. Now the settler, properly speaking, (i. e.
     persons whose birth-place is in Britain, and who are still
     looking to Britain as a home,) are few in number. There are
     not above 1000 of that description beyond the boundaries
     of Calcutta, and not half a dozen of them in any one
     place. They are scattered over the face of the country.
     But if by settlers your Grace understand descendants of
     Europeans born in this country, and of which class many of
     the Indigo-planters, scattered up and down the country,
     are, and include in them descendants of private soldiers
     by native mothers, and children of all descriptions of
     British, and who have been increasing for more than 100
     years, it will, I think, appear that the term is not
     applicable to them. They are, to all intents, native-born
     subjects of this Government, the offspring of the soil. Of
     this class there are in Calcutta not fewer than 4000; and
     at all the principal stations of the army, and in every
     place where Europeans have been stationed, they are to be
     found from 30 to 300 at each. I have placed the subject in
     this light that your Grace may be aware of the true state
     of the class I have in view.

     “It is said that European settlers have no claim on this
     Government for a religious establishment. I will not stay
     to argue that point; but then, I maintain, that these
     Indo-Britons are native-born subjects of the British Indian
     Government, and, therefore, have a claim on a Government
     not only Christian, but proprietors of the land: in fact
     both king and landlord. It has been officially announced
     that schools in which the children of Europeans (i. e.
     perhaps removed six generations from the European stock,)
     are taught together with Hindoos and Mahomedans, have no
     claim on the funds appropriated to native education. Shall
     we then apply to the British Parliament for an annual
     grant, as for Canada? The main object then is to procure
     from the proper quarter an acknowledgment of the duty of
     applying some part of the revenue of this country to the
     education and religious instruction of native Christians,
     in their proportions, as to that of Hindoos and Mahomedans.

     “It is only lately it has become known here that the East
     India Company’s Charter is to be renewed in the next
     session of Parliament, which must plead my excuse for this
     intrusion.”

It was about this time that Archdeacon Corrie supplied the place
of the Government chaplain at Barrackpore, in the absence of the
Rev. H. Fisher, who had proceeded up the country. Except in that
particular, there occurred but little variety in the occupations of
the Archdeacon. His letters, however, mention his desire for the
arrival of the Bishop. Thus in writing to his brother he observes:--

     “I am by no means at ease in my appointment, from the
     increasing ill-will of people who neither do any thing to
     purpose themselves, nor will let those alone who are doing
     what they can. And if I add, that we have at this time the
     hottest weather I have ever experienced in Bengal, having
     no cessation day or night, for nearly a week past, and no
     immediate prospect of change--the catalogue of ill may
     seem complete. But, O! no ill have I experienced, compared
     with the least I every day deserve; and much of mercy
     remains to mingle in the cup. The departure of my beloved
     father from Colsterworth, seemed much to weaken my tie to
     England, his death still more. This country may now become
     my home for the remainder of my pilgrimage. My strength
     is wonderfully renewed, yet I cannot conceive of any in
     England, not positively ill, experiencing the lassitude
     I am seldom free from. Yet the younger sons of the best
     English families, are coming out in this service in crowds,
     and even the heirs apparent to titles; such we are told is
     the difficulty of providing in any creditable way, for the
     sons of the gentry.”

The Archdeacon adds:--

     “I know not whether you have time to read Reviews. I think
     they are, as far as the facts detailed can be relied on,
     the history of Providence, and the last article[147] in
     the Quarterly for April, seems on true grounds to forebode
     much distress to Britain. This also falls in, I think, with
     the prophetic intimations respecting these times. I see no
     ground whatever, for the doctrines of a ‘Personal Reign,’
     or a first literal resurrection, but I do think with Scott,
     that the witnesses are about to be slain. Mr. Faber’s idea
     of _trouble at hand_, seems just in agreement; though I
     have no idea of two Churches being represented by the
     ‘witnesses.’ There can be but one true Church; but whether
     it be the witnesses _continuing_ to prophecy in sackcloth,
     still, the result is likely to be the same; and England now
     in league with the Apostacy,[148] must not expect to escape
     the plagues, under which it shall utterly perish. Babylon
     is already fallen in the purpose of God, and unless
     England purge away the leaven that has crept into her, with
     Babylon must be her end.”

About the middle of November 1829, the Archdeacon was released from
much anxiety, and depression of spirits, by the return to India of
Mrs. Corrie. In announcing her safe arrival, he writes


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

                                                  “Nov. 30, 1829.

     “To me the mercy is beyond expression. You can never know
     the depression of a separation such as I have experienced.
     Death alone could have rendered it more hopeless, but
     scarcely less painful: but thanks be to God it is over, and
     if it be His will, may no such trial befal me again! Our
     anxieties are now about our children. They seem placed in
     most desirable circumstances: may the blessing of God but
     attend the instructions they receive! Whilst we cannot but
     desire that they should acquire useful knowledge, and not
     be altogether without the knowledge of the usual manners
     of their class in life, our hearts’ chief prayer and
     desire of God for them is, that they may become wise unto
     salvation.’ ... How precious that promise, ‘I will be thy
     God, and the God of thy seed!’ But for this what could we
     do for them at this distance? But our God heareth prayer;
     He remembereth his ‘covenant to a thousand generations.’
     In reading Deuteronomy, the expression, ‘that it may be
     well with thee and _thy seed after thee_,’ supplies both a
     stimulus to duty and an encouragement. Whilst we are about
     our Lord’s work here, He will be merciful and gracious to
     our children.”

It was now that there occurred an event of great moral and
political importance to India. All the Missionaries in Calcutta and
neighbourhood, had some months ago presented a memorial to Lord
William Bentinck, respecting the cruel practice of widow-burning;
and Government had been in the habit of discouraging that revolting
superstition without venturing directly to prohibit it. But, after
satisfying themselves of the feelings of the Native army and Native
community, the Governor General in Council, took the decisive step
of adopting a Regulation on the 4th of December, to the effect of
declaring “the habit of Suttee, or burning or burying alive the
widows of Hindoos, illegal and punishable by the Criminal Courts.”

Soon after the date of this Regulation, Bishop Turner, (who had
been consecrated in the preceding May,) arrived in Calcutta. The
Archdeacon having mentioned in a letter to his brother, that the
Bishop preached in the Cathedral for the first time on Sunday, 13th
December, observes

     “Bishop Turner seems to come in a spirit of Christian
     conciliation. I will not say much lest I should be
     disappointed. He is, however, liked, and will be popular in
     all probability.”

Then after having stated how much the account which Mrs. Corrie had
given of his relatives in England, had “rekindled in him a desire to
be again among them,” the Archdeacon adds,

     “I am however thought, I find, a party man in Church
     politics, and it may be so in part, but how far it is right
     or not you cannot tell. I have said to H. that it is an
     easy matter for you at home to cast your guinea into the
     treasury of this or that Society, in the hope that good
     will arise from it; but the _application_ of your bounty,
     is a more difficult operation. Whether Jesus Christ shall
     be set forth in the glory of His grace before the Gentiles,
     or shall be made a mere ‘Master of the ceremonies,’ as
     Hervey[149] expresses it, to introduce to the Divine
     presence human merit, is no indifferent question. And here
     we have to decide upon that question, in the application
     of English liberality. But indeed, brother, I try to watch
     over myself in this respect also; and if I had opportunity,
     could cooperate with even a Papist, in the conversion of
     the heathen. I do think, however, that what I have done has
     effected good.”

Then with reference to the late Government Regulation he observes,

     “If I should say nothing about the abolition of Suttee, you
     would think it strange. Great honour has the Government
     gained in this matter. Addresses of congratulation to Lord
     W. B., from the European Society, and from the Hindoo also,
     and Mahomedan classes, are getting signed by numbers.”

To his Sister, also, the Archdeacon writes

                                                  “Dec. 17, 1829.

     “The glorious abolition of Suttee, will distinguish the
     present Government, when the discontent arising from
     retrenchment will be forgotten.”

Then with regard to the expected renewal of the charter of the East
India Company, he adds

     “The more general admission of Europeans into this
     country seems determined upon; which will help forward
     the progress of Christianity, in its remote consequences;
     but will probably ruin many in a temporal point of view.
     From all I can learn, commerce is a losing concern to the
     merchant generally. The mere agent, of course, deducts his
     commission from the scanty produce, and thrives. But what
     is all this to you, I begin to think, although, indeed,
     in its consequences, it may extend even to Morcott. A few
     years, I have heard some experienced men say, is likely
     to produce a general crash; and then our dividends and
     pensions may be put in jeopardy: so that mere selfishness
     might make one alive to national affairs; whilst to the
     Christian they supply matter for much prayer and solicitude
     before God. My favourite theme, inspiration and song,
     is much involved in all this progress of things. It may
     be that in time of adversity men may consider how much
     their all depends on God, and may become more careful of
     missionary work, which is so peculiarly His own. We have
     had days of ease and outward prosperity, and little heart
     has been found, and little of a right spirit, even in those
     who favour the righteous cause.”

Of the new Bishop of Calcutta, the Archdeacon observes--

     “He promises to be everything desirable in his station, and
     you will be glad to hear that he approves of all my public
     acts. I have shewn him, also, a letter which I wrote to the
     Archbishop of Canterbury, all of which he approves and
     said, that he had nothing to do but to follow up the views
     there stated.”

Within a month of the date of this letter, one of those failures
in the mercantile world occurred, which some “experienced men” had
anticipated. The Archdeacon, writing “of general news,” observes


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                         “Calcutta, Jan. 8. 1829.

     “The failure of Palmer’s house has created the most
     extensive ruin for a long time experienced. Three millions
     are said to be the extent of the debts: they promise to pay
     half, but it does not seem [to be] expected. This, with
     the forgeries you have heard of, amounting, I am told, to
     twenty-two Lacs, have given a lesson of the uncertainty
     of riches such as perhaps never occurred, at one time, in
     any single community before. It is impossible to enumerate
     the losses sustained by individuals. Some reduced from
     wealth to nothing; others from a pittance to beggary. Truly
     ‘riches make to themselves wings and fly away,’ but this
     will make no one, it is to be feared, less eager in the
     pursuit of them.”

After relating some private matters connected with the state of
society in Calcutta, the Archdeacon proceeds

     “The Bishop held his first Visitation last Wednesday, the
     6th inst. He had appointed me to preach, and afterwards
     I was requested by the Bishop and Clergy to publish the
     Sermon. The Bishop told me privately that it was the
     thing of all others, he should wish to send to England at
     this time. I feel grateful for the acceptance, whilst I
     cannot but feel, that time and circumstances, and not the
     merits of the Sermon, call it forth.[150]... The Bishop
     seems bent on conciliation, with more decision than his
     predecessor.... He has become Patron of the Calcutta Bible
     Society, President of the Church Missionary Society, and
     is to preside this evening at a public meeting of the
     Bible Association in the Town Hall. He has attended the
     examination of schools, at Mirzapore, Mrs. Wilson’s school,
     the Female Orphan Asylum, and other Institutions.

     “Jan. 16th. Among the sudden changes which occur here
     frequently, not the least unexpected, is the severe illness
     of the Bishop’s Chaplain, and the necessity, as the doctors
     affirm, of his return to Europe. In consequence, the Bishop
     requested as a personal kindness, that we would take up our
     abode with him. After two days deliberation, we have agreed
     to do so, not without much apprehension on my part. To keep
     a conscience void of offence, both towards God and man,
     will, I fear, not be easy; but many advantages may arise
     from the arrangement, if we can but keep the even path of
     duty. The Bishop may be rendered more happy in his work;
     and social prayer, which were he alone must be omitted,
     will also help to keep up in him, as well as in us, proper
     feelings as well as right views. I shall benefit by his
     conversation, and learn somewhat of the altered state of
     society in England, as all I hear leads me to conclude. Our
     mutual official duties may be more readily effected, and
     the plans of the various Societies carried forward.”

The following notice of passing events, as given in the same letter,
may not be without interest:--

     “You would be delighted to see how crowded the Old Church
     now is. Yesterday the Bishop preached there. The city is
     now divided into parishes, and each is to have its own
     vestry, and care of its own poor. Yesterday a sermon was
     preached, and 1753 Rs. collected for the poor of the Old
     Church district.... The Bishop has confirmed 317 persons,
     which, considering that a confirmation was held in June,
     1828, shews a rapid increase of population.”

On the 18th of February 1830, the Archdeacon and his wife went to
reside at the palace as the Bishop’s inmates; and the following
memorandum, which occurs under that date, in his private Journal,
does but reiterate the sentiments contained in the preceding letter:--

     “We have to-day entered on a new course, by taking up our
     abode with the Bishop, on his invitation. It has been
     the subject of much anxiety with us, and of prayer. The
     reasons which determined us to this step are these:--1st.
     The Bishop’s kind invitation:--His loneliness from the
     departure of Mr. Carter; and the hope that our being here,
     may help to keep up the habits of domestic religion to
     which he had for some time been accustomed. 2nd. On our
     own part, the desire to benefit by his conversation and
     extensive acquirements; and to be workers together in the
     progress of improvement, both in and out of the Established
     Church, especially in the work of missions. 3rd. As it
     respects our usefulness in society, we shall be prevented
     shewing hospitality to the same extent as formerly; and if
     it should prevent any of our young friends, who are aiming
     at improvement in personal piety, from visiting us, the
     change will be unfavourable; but it will, also, cut us off
     from much unprofitable visiting and expence, to which,
     of late years, we have been much exposed, and by which I
     have been much tried. 4th. We shall be much more under
     restraint than in our own separate dwelling; but shall at
     the same time see more of each other, and for this we have
     been sighing for years past. O that we may but be enabled
     to improve the opportunities afforded, to our mutual growth
     in every gift, and especially in the love of the Saviour,
     as well as those things which make for our everlasting
     peace! For this we are insufficient of ourselves. May the
     grace of Christ rest upon us, and then shall we prosper!”

During the year 1829 an edition of the Book of Common Prayer in
Hindoostanee having been printed by the Calcutta Corresponding
Committee of the Prayer-Book and Homily Society, under the
superintendence of Archdeacon Corrie, he forwarded a copy of that
important work to England, for the purpose of having it presented to
the public library in Cambridge. His reason for doing this is thus
stated in a letter, of March 5, 1830,


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

     “I have been led to do this from our Bishop taking the
     trouble to send a copy to the Bodleian Library at Oxford.
     If it be worthy of a place in the one, as the Bishop
     thinks, it may be equally so of a place at Cambridge.”

The history of a work by means of which the Services of the Church
of England were first made accessible to the Native christians of
Hindoostan, may not here be omitted, especially as that history
has been supplied by the Archdeacon himself. To the Secretary of
the Calcutta Corresponding Committee of the Prayer-Book and Homily
Society, he writes

     “When I began this edition of the Book of Common Prayer in
     Hindoostanee,[151] it was at first intended to have altered
     very little from the Compendium, printed by the Prayer Book
     and Homily Society in London, but a near adherence to that
     model was soon found impracticable. I will here state, that
     the above Compendium, which is usually ascribed to the late
     Rev. H. Martyn, was the fruit of my own labour fifteen
     years ago, and that with very inadequate help. It seems but
     due to that eminent scholar, that I should publicly avow
     this, as his translation of the New Testament, shows how
     inferior the Compendium of the Prayer Book is to his style,
     and how altogether unworthy of his fame. The Compendium
     however, has answered an important purpose; the want of
     something of the kind was so much felt by many native
     christians, that it was eagerly adopted by them, and its
     imperfections even have gained currency among them.

     “It was at first intended, also to have printed a small
     portion only of the new edition, with a view to collect
     the opinions of competent persons, respecting the
     execution; but the difficulty of obtaining such opinions,
     from the complete occupation of the time of every public
     Functionary in his official duties, is well known; and
     the delay that must inevitably arise on that plan, to the
     accomplishment of a work much needed, seemed to urge the
     necessity of making the most of present time, and of using
     the assistance providentially supplied, whilst it could
     be had. On this account the whole of the Book of Common
     Prayer, including every part of the Rubric and Articles
     of Religion, has been printed. The State Prayers, as they
     are usually called, are not included, nor the Psalms:
     the latter, are printed separately by the Auxiliary Bible
     Society, and can be supplied in that form to congregations
     prepared to use them. After the translation was finished,
     the native assistants were necessarily retained, till the
     work should be carried through the Press: this afforded
     opportunity for translating the Ordination Services also,
     and 100 copies were printed. Of the whole Book three
     hundred copies have been printed; and to 100 copies of
     these are added the Ordination Services. These, it may be
     said, are not likely soon to be brought into use, but that
     seems no reason why the mode adopted by our Church, in
     these services, and the scriptural sentiments they breathe,
     should not be laid open to the natives of this country.
     Besides these complete copies, 1000 copies of the Psalter
     have been printed for more general distribution. Owing to
     my absence from Calcutta, more of the Occasional Offices
     were added than is usual in such a Compendium; but though
     a little more expence has thus been incurred, the work is
     more valuable. One thousand copies, also, of the Morning
     and Evening Prayers and Litany, with the occasional Prayers
     and Thanksgivings, have been printed in Nagree, for the
     benefit of Christians who use only that character.

     “It seems necessary to state, that some English terms
     have been retained, an explanation of them being given
     in parenthesis, where they are first used. On this point
     there will probably be a difference of opinion, but as the
     English terms are familiar to Native Christians connected
     with the British; and the words, Sacrament, Baptism, and
     such like, derived from the Latin Scriptures, are used by
     the numerous Roman Catholic Christians of this country, the
     retaining of them in the Prayer Book, is at least useful to
     these classes, whilst it is obvious, that the words, Lent,
     Whit-sunday, and some others, do not at all explain the
     events they are used to distinguish, and a word common to
     several classes of christians, and to which they all attach
     the same meaning, may as well be used as any other, whilst
     it tends to unite them by a common phraseology.

     “The assistance I have received from a person brought up
     in the country, and well versed in the writers, both in
     Persian and Hindoostanee, most esteemed by learned natives,
     allows me to hope that the translation, generally, is
     likely to bear the test of candid criticism. The chief
     objection which I anticipate, arises from the difficulty
     of clothing many ideas peculiarly Christian, in popular
     language. The natives of this country, at the same
     time, generally have the ideas themselves to acquire,
     and the christian teacher may therefore as readily
     explain the meaning of an appropriate term, as, by using
     circumlocutions, lower the standard of the language and
     keep his people in a low state of mental cultivation.
     I will only add that often the attaching a shade of
     difference to the meaning of a word, would lead to a
     conclusion unfavourable to the translator, without cause: I
     am at the same time aware, that improvements may be made in
     the work, and hope, if life and opportunity be vouchsafed,
     to bring forth hereafter a more perfect edition.”

In the same letter to his brother, which is referred to above, the
Archdeacon states

     “Our affairs here go on in one uniform course of public
     grumbling, and private discontent. All who are touched by
     the retrenchments of Government, think they have cause to
     complain, and the army are certainly hardly used. But I try
     to have little to say in these matters. Missionary matters
     and education, supply sufficient employment without going
     into politics. We would fain make faster progress, but
     sickness, and obstacles arising from climate, hinder us;
     and we must be content to follow the course of Providence,
     and not to force it.

     “You will have heard through Sherer, that we have become
     part of the Bishop’s household. I find his conversation
     very improving: he is naturally cheerful, and our
     intercourse is easy and agreeable. A part of his plan
     is to constitute his Archdeacons, his commissaries,
     and to delegate to them the details of the respective
     Archdeaconries. I continue, therefore, a Bishop _in
     partibus_ still, and having such opportunities of reference
     to the Bishop on all occasions, I am not likely to commit
     the interests of the church. The only point on which I
     differ from the Bishop, is on the policy of allowing
     Missionaries to engage in English duties. This is a far
     easier employment, than proper missionary work, and it
     is, moreover, a misapplication of Missionary funds. It
     will also prevent, I fear, the East India Company, from
     contributing as they ought, to the support of a ministry
     for their christian subjects.

     “I scarcely know what part of our history here will most
     interest you. The abolition of Suttee will no doubt be
     heard of all over Europe. The last year presented a return
     of 800 widows, and upward, consigned to the fire in this
     presidency. Of these upwards of 600 took place in Bengal;
     so that in this one province the strength of the practice
     lay. A considerable sensation has therefore been felt in
     Calcutta, but no where else. At Benares, Suttees have been
     even prevented, and the poor widow (glad no doubt) retired
     quietly home, saying, Such was her fate. What has been said
     against the abolition in Calcutta, has been chiefly by
     some of the most wealthy. They are not, however, united;
     arguments pro and con are discussed among themselves, with
     great freedom, and no little acrimony, and they exhibit
     the spectacle of a family divided against itself. I wish
     you were more of a politician. We require on the renewal
     of the East India Company’s charter, that some further
     expression of public opinion should be shown, on the
     subject of christian education. Years ago, Mr. Wilberforce
     obtained that 100,000 rupees should be appropriated towards
     the moral improvement of this people by education. The
     said sum is indeed appropriated, but it is to Mahomedan and
     Hindoo learning, such as it is: now what is required is,
     that Christian education should also have a share of the
     public support.”

The following letter to Mr. Sherer, about the same date, supplies
some interesting particulars connected with the state of society in
Calcutta.

     “We have been now nearly a month in the Bishop’s house.
     Our mode of life is as follows: prayers at eight o’clock,
     when the bishop sometimes expounds; and again, also, at
     half past nine o’clock in the evening. We breakfast after
     prayers; have _tiffin_[152] at two o’clock, dinner at half
     past six or seven. One evening, (Friday) any person who is
     not afraid of the Bible, is welcome to come in at eight
     o’clock, and after tea the Bishop reads and expounds, and
     dismisses us with prayer. In the season of Lent, the Bishop
     catechizes in the Cathedral, on Wednesday mornings, and
     preaches in the evening on Fridays. He is frequently at
     the Thursday evening lecture. He visited lately with me at
     Burdwan, and takes a lively interest in Missions; preaches
     in Bishop’s College Chapel, on Sunday evenings, to the few
     students and others, and enters much into the affairs of
     that institution. A Chapel is commenced at the free school,
     and a Mariner’s Church at the custom-house is preparing,
     and the building of a Church at Howrah is in progress. A
     form of an association for the better observance of the
     Lord’s day has been drawn up by the Bishop, and sent to the
     Chaplains, and all the dissenting Ministers; and yesterday,
     sermons were preached in all the Churches and Chapels
     here, on the duty of sanctifying the Sabbath. From these
     particulars, you will judge what spirit he is of. In our
     habitual intercourse he is cheerful, communicative, and
     instructive; and hitherto, all has gone on very happily,
     with every promise of continuing to do so. Among the
     changes the Bishop has brought about is, the establishment
     of charitable committees connected with each church. They
     have been in operation above a month, and promise much
     good, both from the prevention of imposition, and the right
     appropriation of charity.

     “The Hindoo College is working faster than its present
     supporters wish. The youths are growing up free-thinkers;
     and lately, some of them partook of a feast with one of the
     infidel christian teachers. The thing got wind, and the
     parents (one a Brahmin) became alarmed. An inquiry was set
     on foot, and the thing hushed up, but a strict injunction
     issued, that religion in any shape should not be mentioned
     to the pupils. It has occurred to me that these high and
     rich Hindoos, may soon find themselves obliged to urge the
     Government to pass a regulation, that loss of caste may
     not deprive individuals of property. A pro-suttee party is
     set on foot. Radah Cant Deb and others being members. They
     call themselves the _Dhurm Soubah_ (which, as you have been
     so so long away, I may translate for you) “the righteous
     association;” but they have already fallen out about a
     treasurer: and strong recriminations are published, which
     promise little co-operation among them.

     “O how greatly do we need steady good men at Mirzapore.
     The situation of the mission-premises is becoming more and
     more important. All the modern reformed Hindoos reside in
     that quarter; and a man of fair attainments and attractive
     character placed there, might become a mighty instrument of
     good. Well: no doubt the right person will be forthcoming
     in the right time.”

As explanatory of the labours of Bishop Turner, mentioned above,
it may not be out of place to state, that of late years European
paupers had increased to such an extent in Calcutta, that not
only had the charitable funds in the hands of the Select Vestry
at the Cathedral, become inadequate to meet the exigencies of the
distressed, but frauds had been practised with such facility on the
charitable part of the community, that it became necessary to provide
for the fuller investigation of the cases of applicants for relief.
To remedy these evils a “Charitable Society” was formed at the
suggestion of the Bishop, which was carried on by a Central Committee
of Superintendance aided by subordinate Committees, corresponding
in number with the ecclesiastical districts into which Calcutta was
divided.

It will be seen, also, by the following memorandum, dated April 10,
1830, that the Archdeacon, for his part, had not been unmindful of
the necessity of labouring for the public good, though his success
seems to have fallen short of his wishes.

     “In reviewing the past year, much cause, both for
     humiliation and for gratitude appears. In my own
     experience, a sense of defect and failure cannot but be
     felt. I can see nothing accomplished either in a public
     or private view. Nothing have I attained but to know more
     deeply that I am nothing, and must be indebted wholly to
     grace: yea, to grace pardoning grievous despite, leaping
     over opposition, and ‘carrying off the prey,’ without
     corresponding effort on my part to fall in with grace.
     In public I attempted [to establish] a school for the
     country-born. The scheme was too large; and, in yielding
     this point to N----, my own folly appears. I failed also
     with Howrah, through the opposition of unreasonable men.
     But both these objects are likely to be attained by the
     Bishop: and in this ‘I rejoice.’ Let good but be effected,
     and ‘I will rejoice.’ Other schemes I had in mind for the
     furtherance and establishment of the gospel, which are
     approved by the Bishop; especially the plan of endowments,
     in which I hope something may be accomplished. I have been
     much tried in respect of Mirzapore. Expectations from the
     school baffled and likely to fail, from the failure (for
     so it is in fact) of R. Missionary prospects much clouded,
     from the lack of instruments. Yet doubtless the working is
     advancing, and the gospel is spreading. These are matters
     of much thought with me.... If I could, with propriety,
     withdraw to a quiet missionary station, my mind would
     have what at all times seems best for it; but to withdraw
     from a post to which I have been called, without a clear
     dispensation leading to it, would embitter such a plan. I
     see nothing for it, but patiently to abide in my present
     situation, and to wait till affairs indicate what I ought
     to do. May I only be preserved from giving offence in my
     public or private capacity; and may I have grace to improve
     opportunities of working in the service of the gospel!”

But notwithstanding this somewhat dispirited view of the results of
his labours, the hopes of the Archdeacon respecting the establishing
of a school for the country-born, seemed about to be realized so
soon as that important project was taken in hand by the Bishop. In
a letter which the Archdeacon wrote on the 23rd of April 1830, he
observes


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

     “I wrote to you some time since respecting a project for
     a school in this city. We are still busy about it, and
     not without hopes of succeeding in establishing it. Great
     obstacles, however, occur. Our Government just now is too
     much on the Utilitarian system; which seems to mean, ‘That
     every one must do the best he can for himself, seeing
     that no aid is to be afforded.’ One thing this will work,
     which for this country will prove beneficial, whatever
     it may prove to Old England--it will render this country
     independent of England. It is well, certainly, that the
     resources of this country, both individual and general,
     should be called forth, and with a little forbearing care,
     they might for ages be auxiliary to the mother-country; but
     by refusing present aid, unkind feelings are called forth,
     and where no obligation is conferred on the one hand, no
     gratitude is felt on the other.”

The letter in which the preceding observations are contained, was
not finished until the 11th of May, under which date the Archdeacon
adds:--

     “Nothing further has occurred here worth remarking,
     except that a master has unexpectedly turned up for the
     Grammar-School. Pray do you ever think of India in a
     political point of view? How the charter is constituted,
     or whether it can be altered for the better? We seem to
     want some attention from home; and I would fain hope we
     shall get it now the charter is again to be discussed. We
     are under the regulations of the Government as to abode.
     If one would establish a school, or promote education
     in any way, we are liable to be banished to England, if
     Government should not happen to like our project; and, if
     it does, we must ask leave to pay the expences out of our
     own pockets, for not a Rupee will Government give: and yet
     in this presidency alone, seven millions sterling are drawn
     annually from the land, and as much more from monopolies
     of salt, and opium, and from certain duties! Is none of
     this to be laid out otherwise than to promote increased
     dividends in Leadenhall Street?”

An able head-master having thus been obtained in the person of the
Rev. J. Macqueen, it was determined on the 4th of June 1830, to
establish the “Calcutta High School,” on a plan arranged by Bishop
Turner. To provide for the educational department, it was proposed
to raise a sum of money by transferable shares, which were to bear
interest arising from dividends of profits; the shares to be paid by
instalments, and the proceeds to be vested in the names of certain
Trustees. A Committee of management and visitors was appointed, and
such regulations agreed upon as were calculated to give efficiency
and stability to the school. But that at which the Archdeacon chiefly
aimed was, if possible to obtain from Government, or the benevolence
of individuals, an endowment for the School. But the little prospect
there was of assistance from the former source will be collected from
a letter written by the Archdeacon


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                                  “June 17, 1830.

     “Our increased acquaintance with the Bishop renders us more
     at home with him, and we see more to admire in him. He is
     by far best suited for this appointment of any who have
     occupied it. With more practical knowledge of men, and of
     parochial matters than any of them, he has large views of
     usefulness; and, with perfect propriety of language, states
     them to Government. Had we a man who had any fixed views
     of Government at the head of affairs, something effectual
     might be accomplished for the religious welfare of India,
     but when ---- is on one hand, and ---- on the other, of
     Government, what can be expected but fancies and crudities?
     And such seem most of the public acts at present.

     “I may mention to you that in a Report on Ecclesiastical
     affairs lately made up by the Finance Committee, the
     employment of missionaries generally, without regard to
     class, and Roman Catholic priests, was recommended, to
     prevent increase of chaplains; and the principle broadly
     affirmed, that Government is not bound to supply the means
     of grace to any besides the European troops, to which the
     charter binds them. This gave opportunity to state other
     views and principles, which must have surprised certain
     persons not a little. You need not be surprised, should you
     hear of the Bishop’s arrival in England a few months hence;
     as it is quite evident, that should the Home Government
     depend on the information derived from this quarter,
     nothing will be done for us in an ecclesiastical point of
     view; and twenty more years of this miserable system [will]
     be perpetrated, which can only end in confusion almost
     irremediable.”


      [146] Chief Justice.

      [147] “On the state and prospects of the country.”

      [148] The allusion is to that legislative alliance with
            Popery which marked the year 1829.

      [149] Theron and Aspasio, Dialog. vii.

      [150] The text selected on this occasion was 2 Cor. iv.
            5; the purpose of the preacher was to shew 1st,
            “What is the subject-matter of a faithful minister’s
            teaching;” and 2nd, what “His object and aim in his
            labours.”

      [151] The edition of 1829.

      [152] Luncheon.




                           CHAPTER XVIII.

     DISQUIETUDE CONCERNING THE ANGLO-HINDOO COLLEGE--DEATH OF BISHOP
       TURNER.


On the 20th of June, 1830, Archdeacon Corrie left Calcutta in
company with the Bishop, with a view to attend that Prelate in a
visitation of the Upper Provinces. They proceeded, however, only
as far as Chunar, circumstances having decided the Bishop to defer
his Visitation of Delhi and the intermediate Stations. The Bishop
and Archdeacon, therefore, returned to the Presidency by the latter
end of September. One result of this journey was, to create a
greater anxiety than ever in the mind of the Archdeacon, that in the
contemplated renewal of the East India Company’s Charter, some more
efficient provision should be made for the spiritual wants of India,
than had hitherto been the case. On that important subject he writes,


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                         “Calcutta, Oct. 6, 1830.

     “The times are troublous both at home and abroad;
     discontent is spread through every branch of this service,
     in many cases unreasonably, in many the privations actually
     inflicted cause much distress. Your political atmosphere
     seems very cloudy;--what may follow the death of George
     IV. we dare not conjecture. It affects my mind especially,
     with reference to the renewal of the East India Company’s
     charter. ‘The Lord reigneth,’ might well serve on this
     head, as on the affairs of England; but I have no call to
     interfere in the latter, whereas I must plead for India.
     Do, beloved brother, look about for aid in this matter;
     affairs here in reference to religion are more and more
     pressing. The young civilians are now sent out of Calcutta
     soon after their arrival, qualified or not, so that at the
     small stations, there are more than formerly. You will
     remember that out-of-the-way place Azimgurh: there are five
     civilians, three young officers, and a doctor, with the
     usual _Cranies_:[153] such is the general increase at our
     Stations. Now, a Chaplain at each of such stations, is too
     much at present to expect, but such a number as would admit
     of a Chaplain from Benares, Gazeepore, or Gorruckpore,
     visiting the subordinate stations at stated intervals,
     might and ought to be allowed. Instead of this, it is
     recommended from this [Government], to reduce the present
     number of Chaplains to seven, and to secure the occasional
     services of Missionaries, of any and every persuasion, and
     to abolish the Scotch establishment altogether. Our House
     of Commons seems indeed at a low ebb. From what a height
     of splendour, in eloquence and lofty feelings at least,
     is Parliament fallen. I look in vain for an advocate for
     poor India, in all that passes,--at least as reported
     here. Perhaps a dissolution of Parliament may bring to
     light some ‘gem of purer ray;’ though it is rather to
     be feared lest India be lost sight of amidst contending
     politics at home. I can tell you in confidence, that our
     Bishop has represented to the powers here, that by such
     a scheme of Church arrangements as above, Government
     would recognise Missions, which they have never done;
     have no control over the agents so authorised; and that
     by a variety of procedure in those employed, confusion
     probably would ensue. Whereas if they are serious in
     their attempts to extend sound knowledge, by extending
     the Church establishment, and taking more pains than at
     present to secure fit persons, they might provide a body
     of most efficient agents in forwarding the improvement of
     the country. I need not tell you, except to refresh your
     memory, that were a Clergyman of respectable character
     and attainments placed at Krishnaghur, and every other
     Sudder[154] Station, the indigo-planters would in time
     avail themselves of his services, by coming in with their
     families at the Festivals, or receiving occasional visits
     at their houses; besides, there might be a school under
     his own eye at home. Would not many of the planters be
     induced to establish a school each, which the Chaplain
     would occasionally visit, &c.? All this has been stated
     to the Governor General, who at the time is friendly, but
     is hopeless as to the Court of Directors. Our Bishop is
     of opinion that were the subject taken up judiciously at
     home, by a person not suspected of party spirit; and the
     Bishop of London, and Archbishop, who are both desirous of
     India’s religious welfare, were judiciously instructed how
     to proceed, and fully and truly informed of the state of
     things here,--that the Duke of Portland, for instance, and
     many in high places would join in furthering an extension
     of Church establishment, _along with other_ measures. The
     subject taken up singly, our Bishop fears, would not find
     sufficient patronage. I have said all I can, to urge our
     Bishop to go home himself. It would, I know, be a venturing
     of everything, and myself, perhaps, durst not, were I in
     his place, make the venture, yet circumstances seem to call
     for it.

     “A controversy has arisen on the subject of missionary
     exertions, most unexpectedly. The whole history is in
     point. I will send it to you by Captain J. next week. The
     missionary of the Scotch General Assembly, and Mr. Hill,
     opened a Lecture in a house in the square, opposite to the
     Hindoo College: some of the youths attended; the College
     council forbad them!”

The history here referred to, is too instructive to be omitted.
It appears that not only serious christians, but the friends of
morality and social order generally, and many of the parents of the
students in the Hindoo College, had become alarmed at observing,
that whilst the system of education pursued in the College was
subverting the pupils’ faith in Hindooism, it was substituting no
other faith instead. Many of the students, in fact, were becoming
sceptics, others downright atheists. To obviate, if it might be, the
mischievous consequences likely to result from such an education
as that, it was determined to give the students an opportunity for
becoming acquainted with the evidences of Natural and Revealed
religion. In order to this, Mr. Duff, the Missionary of the Scotch
church, having offered the use of his rooms for the purpose, Mr.
James Hill, one of the Missionaries of the London Society, began a
course of lectures on the evidences of religion; and many of the
students of the Hindoo College attended. The subjects discussed
were exclusively religious, and were listened to with marked
attention. But no sooner did it reach the ears of the Managers of
the Anglo-Indian College that these lectures were attended by some
of the students, than that attendance was prohibited by a public
order; as if Christianity were the only religion that ought not to
have a hearing. It was stated at the time, in excuse for such of the
managers of the College as were Europeans, that they had signed the
order of prohibition with a great degree of reluctance, and only
because some of the parents of the students had required the council
to interfere;--but it was not easy to understand how the interdicting
of those Students from listening to Christian missionaries, could
be distinguished from an act of religious persecution. With regard
to the principle on which the Hindoo College was carried on, it was
stated by Archdeacon Corrie in a letter to Mr. Sherer, that at the
first interview which the Archdeacon had with Lord William Bentinck,
he was led to observe to his Lordship that the College was breeding
up a race of Infidels and Philosophers so called; and that the first
petition for a Colonial council would probably come from thence.

The same subject forms a prominent portion of a letter, in the
following month,


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                         “Calcutta, Nov. 4, 1830.

     “I wish sometimes I could have an hour’s conversation
     with you, for I know not how to set about writing all you
     would like to hear. Ram Mohun Roy is a passenger in the
     Albion. It is said he is become a Fakeer, and does not
     lose caste by this proceeding. He has not called on the
     present Bishop. The Hindoo college is working the ruin of
     caste; and, unless better principles be insinuated, the
     ruin of British interests. Miss B. visited the college
     last week, and examined one of the classes in history.
     She asked about America, and was informed very accurately
     of its form of government, with high commendations of the
     limited power of the President; and also of the office
     being elective. On being asked if this had always been
     the condition [of that country,] ‘It was answered, “That
     they were formerly a Colony of England, but that on being
     taxed excessively, they had taken upon them the governing
     of themselves, as,” said the youth, “we shall one day do.”
     To the question, of what religion were the Americans?’
     It was answered, ‘Protestant christians generally, and
     that Unitarianism was making rapid progress among them.’
     Mr. Duff, the Scotch Missionary, goes a good deal into
     the debating Societies, which these Bengalees have
     established lately among themselves. Politics and religion
     are excluded from the subjects of discussion, but when
     discoveries in science or government happen to come up;
     France is eulogised unboundedly, and America; but England,
     if referred to, always depreciated. Thus our Rulers are
     preparing a scourge for their own backs.... I hope, too,
     the counteracting influence is at work. Mr. Duff has a
     school of upwards of 200, in the Chitpore road, in the
     house where first the Anglo-Hindoo College was held. The
     Methodist missionaries have established themselves in
     that street, a little below the Nietta Bazaar, and have
     a school of 115 Portuguese boys, and also some girls;
     and are collecting a Congregation of that class. We have
     seventy boys at Mirzapore; and now a regular congregation
     of upwards of thirty Christians. Mrs. Wilson goes on as
     usual; and a school is, I hope, in a fair way of being
     permanently established on the ruins of the Grammar School.
     It is called the ‘High school,’ and has ninety scholars,
     country-born. A very energetic master is at the head of it.
     A Mariners’ Church has been fitted up just behind Fairlie
     and Co’s. house in the Strand. The attendance of sailors
     has not yet been large, but we hope the place is gaining
     attention.”

Soon after the date of the foregoing Letter, the Archdeacon was
attacked by fever, which almost incapacitated him for attending to
any public duty. The transition, from the hot to the cold season,
was this year so sudden as to cause great unhealthiness in Calcutta.
The Archdeacon complained, in his correspondence, of feeling great
debility, and an “inefficiency arising from lengthened residence in
that wasting climate.” It was during this sickness that the following
memorandum was penned:--

     “Nov. 21, 1830. I have had much meditation of late on
     the inward witness of the Spirit, as a part of christian
     experience which few cultivate as they ought. Besides
     the acknowledging of the truth of God’s word, there must
     be an acquaintance with, and belief of its contents; and
     the experience of it as influencing our tempers and every
     action. Without this latter, there can be no ‘assuring of
     our hearts before him.’ May I be enabled to realise this
     latter truth, and persevere in seeking such realising views
     of God’s mercy in Christ, as shall enable me to say, ‘He
     _loved me_, and gave Himself _for me_! With this witness
     I shall be enabled to pass on the few years that seem to
     remain, with more courage, decision, and usefulness.”

It was not till the middle of January 1831, that Archdeacon Corrie
recovered some degree of health. Then it was that he writes,


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                               “January 15, 1831.

     “We are, through God’s goodness, in our usual health again.
     I had been ill since the beginning of November with a cold,
     and for a time, with fever. The news from France[155] has
     given occasion to balls and dinners, and speeches at the
     Town-Hall here:--may excesses be prevented, and may the
     liberty obtained for Divine truth, be used for extension
     through the whole continent of Europe. Doubtless, ‘The
     time of the end is coming,’ but what its distinct features
     will be, I think the Scriptures do not define, except as
     to the righteousness and peace that shall prevail. Here
     truth advances with slow steps, but it is on the advance,
     doubtless.... Missions are every where receiving additions
     to their converts, though you know how little as yet the
     people can be said to be interested.”


                             TO THE SAME.

                                              “February 24, 1831.

     “Missionary work looks more encouraging than I have ever
     known it here. The classes are adding to their numbers,
     especially in the villages to the south and west of
     Calcutta: at a village called Rass-poonjee twelve miles
     south east, the Church Missionary Society has a school. I
     was there on Monday last with our Missionary ladies. There
     are about fifty children, and a new movement appears in
     sixteen adults formed into an exercising school to learn
     to read. The school-house was filled with people, who
     listened very seriously, in several instances, with marks
     of approbation: whilst, through a native Christian who
     understands English, I set before them the fall of man, and
     the means of his restoration to God and happiness.

     “Mrs. C. and I went to Burdwar last week.... We staid a
     week with the V’s. Twenty-two of the European residents
     attended the communion on Sunday. Among them your shipmate,
     M. S. who is judge there. A gratifying fact was established
     from considerable observation,--that not an individual
     educated in the Mission-schools, has been brought as a
     culprit before the magistrate there. The D’s have also
     120 girls in four schools. I was grieved to observe
     that amongst these favourable appearances there are few
     instances of conversion so deep as one could wish. The
     natives see the temporal advantage of being under a sahib’s
     protection, and though sufferings connected with loss of
     caste are, to a degree, unavoidable, other benefits accrue
     to them. This is evidently favourable to the general
     diffusion of Christian knowledge, but we need greatly, more
     of the Holy Spirit’s grace. This has set us on a union in
     prayer, after the method proposed by Mr. Brown in 1802. I
     will send you soon some of the ‘proceedings.’

     “A newspaper called ‘The Reformer,’ has been set on foot by
     natives, in English, of which four (weekly) numbers have
     appeared, which I will also send you. ‘The schoolmaster
     is abroad,’ but, as I have stated before, the influence
     at work in the ‘Reformer,’ and all in that connexion, is
     anti-English, and Christian only, as it cannot help being
     so.[156] But you will be glad to hear that a lecture on
     ‘Morals,’ is proposed for the Hindoo College.”

Then after referring to some of the religious movements which have
already been mentioned, the Archdeacon adds,

     “With all these favourable appearances, you will understand
     that many perplexities arise in the detail of things. The
     truth of that saying often appears--‘that if Christianity
     were not divine, its own friends would prove its ruin.’ It
     may not appear so manifest at home, but here, where the
     contrast between truth and error is so marked, the errors
     of those holding the truth work much evil.... Would that
     we had some addition to the ‘moral strength,’ as Lord
     Wellesley used to call it, of our department! What will
     the new Charter produce? He who knoweth the end from the
     beginning, is well aware; and knoweth how to overrule all
     to his own glory! O for a stronger faith to look within the
     veil, and to credit what the Saviour saith both in respect
     to one’s self and the world at large! I know not how it is
     with you, but I cannot but feel that the evening of life
     is drawing on; and the expectation of escaping from these
     uncertainties to the possession of eternal realities, is at
     times welcome.”

The “union in prayer,” to which the Archdeacon here refers, was the
result of a meeting of Clergymen, held at his suggestion, in the
Old Church rooms in Calcutta, on the 28th of the preceding month,
“to take into consideration the propriety of uniting in prayer, and
engaging others to do so, for the outpouring of the Holy Spirit.” It
seemed to himself, and others conversant with India, that the state
of religion among professing christians, and the widely extended
ignorance and error of heathen nations, were such as to call forth
the sympathies of all who desired to further the prosperity of the
Church of Christ, and the conversion of the world. Considering,
however, that it is only by the Almighty power and grace of God the
Holy Ghost, that “the whole church is governed and sanctified,”
and that the preaching of the Gospel is in an age or country made
effectual to the conversion and salvation of those who hear, it was
agreed by the Archdeacon and his clerical friends, to set apart
individually a stated portion of time for the purpose of praying
God “the Father, that for Christ’s sake, He would pour His Spirit
upon all flesh.” They agreed, also, to engage their congregations
and friends, as much as possible, to unite with them severally in
prayer, at the same stated time and for the same great object.
The resolutions agreed upon at the meeting were subscribed by the
Archdeacon and the other Clergymen, and were embodied in a circular,
in which also were pointed out the special objects for which the
influences of the Holy Spirit should be sought. This circular
seems to have been reprinted, and made the subject of supercilious
animadversions in some of the Calcutta newspapers. Nor was that
matter for surprise; since persons who had deluded themselves with
the belief that science and merely secular education, were alone
sufficient to make man what God would have him to be, could not be
expected to understand and enter into the convictions of those
who regarding the grace and influence of the Holy Ghost to be
essential to the true civilization of the world, prayed and laboured
accordingly.

The allusion by the Archdeacon to the “errors of those who held the
truth,” was called forth by the circumstance that some in India
had been unsettled by a Treatise on Faith, written by Mr. Thomas
Erskine, a Scotch advocate, and which had recently reached Calcutta.
This book, though of but ephemeral existence, seems to have produced
discussion at the time, and excited in the Archdeacon some fears
lest it should have diverted the attention of his friends from the
great truths which accompany salvation. His own reflections on Mr.
Erskine’s opinions are contained in a memorandum, dated

     “April 10, 1831. To-day I have attained fifty-four years,
     and of these, twenty-nine spent in the ministry. In review
     of the past, chiefly unprofitableness and unfaithfulness
     is to be seen. My own defects are certainly becoming more
     apparent to myself: the fulness and freeness of the Gospel
     become increasingly glorious, and nothing but full, free,
     unconditional forgiveness of all sin, and justification
     from all things, would meet my case. With reference to
     the past year, I do hope some progress has been made.
     Much enquiry has been stirred up by Erskine’s view of the
     Gospel: I have examined it with much anxiety, but see no
     reason to change my former views on that subject. Pardon
     is full and free to all who receive Christ, because life
     eternal is in Him; and whosoever receives Him cannot
     fail of life eternal, yea, possesses it with Him. There
     may be some occasion for Mr. E’s charge against some for
     referring exclusively to fruits as an evidence of faith.
     I think I have met with some who, whilst they acknowledge
     justification to be exclusively of faith, yet depend on
     works to justify their faith; and thus their dependence,
     after all, is on works. Such, as far as I know myself, is
     not my feeling.”

It has here to be stated that Bishop Turner had quitted Calcutta at
the end of September 1830, with the intention of visiting the other
Presidencies. His Lordship had proceeded overland from Madras to
Bombay, and from thence had gone to Ceylon. During his Visitation he
had maintained a regular correspondence with Archdeacon C. and seems
now to have been on his way back to Calcutta; for the Archdeacon
writes,


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                       “Calcutta, April 30, 1831.

     “Our kind Bishop is not yet returned, but we are expecting
     him daily. He left Colombo on the 4th for Jaffna, &c. to
     Madras; and thence by sea hither. He is much out of heart
     with Ceylon in everything but as respects Missionary work;
     and he says that the Church Missionary Society has done,
     and is doing enough there, to answer all the expenditure
     ever incurred by it. I am desiring him back greatly, the
     times seeming to call for him here, for which his wisdom
     and pious liberality will, I hope, be found just suited.”

Then follow some instructive particulars respecting the Anglo-Hindoo
College.

     “The Hindoo college you knew when yet in embryo, and
     your conclusion of an argument with H. M. is beginning
     to be realized, ‘Well, well, build away, and some will
     come after you who will use it in a proper manner.’ The
     mode proceeded on, has succeeded in detaching many of the
     Hindoo youths from religion of every kind. In sentiment
     this has appeared for three or four years, it now begins
     to appear in practice. At the late East Indian dinner,
     sixteen Hindoo lads had bought tickets to go, actually
     determining to break through all restraints. This was
     however prevented; Sir E. R., Mr. C., and J. Y. were the
     means of preventing their young friends from doing this
     open violence to Hindoo feeling; but one youth of the
     Moterjee family has left his home, and taken a house,
     determined to live in European fashion. He was, also, about
     to marry a young woman of Portuguese origin, one of the
     De Rozio family, but this I am told is put off. The main
     mover in the meeting among the Hindoos is D., the poet.
     Mr. H. W. became so convinced of the need of morals to the
     Hindoo College system, that he proposed a moral philosophy
     lecture, and D. as the lecturer. W. B., who is one of the
     Committee of Public Education, let his colleagues, who had
     consented, know the character of D. and it was agreed best
     to postpone the appointment; and now D. is dismissed from
     the Hindoo College on a charge, by respectable Hindoos, of
     Atheism. He stoutly denied the charge; but they said, ‘We
     see your works.’ It is evident the English I have named,
     are at their wit’s end. The young men say, they will no
     longer be guilty of the hypocrisy of upholding Hindooism.
     Christianity they have been warned against as an English
     prejudice; and they seem to hate Christianity and England
     heartily. Their advisers now say, ‘Wait for Ram Mohun Roy’s
     return.’ In the mean time, some of the youths are gone
     to other schools. Upwards of fifty have left the Hindoo
     College, six are entered at the High School. Mrs. Wilson
     has a party daily of from ten to fifteen who come expressly
     to read the Scriptures with her. One begged for an English
     Testament, Mrs. W. said, ‘You can understand Bengalee
     better,’ but, said she, ‘I dare not take a Bengalee one
     home. An English one my friends will not suspect, and I
     can read it at leisure.’ Two come daily to Mr. Sandys
     at Mirzapore, professedly to be assisted in preparing
     their lessons; but they always also read the Bible. They
     are not of the first in wealth; that class seem to a man
     opposed to every thing English. Not a movement in favour
     of religion in any form is heard of. This has arisen in a
     degree, from the part R. and his friends,[157] have been
     and are playing. They complain as if they had lost mighty
     privileges once in possession, and claim to be employed by
     the state, as a matter of right. This I think has arisen
     from Government having withheld all patronage from plans
     of Christian improvement. The little they are advanced
     above former days, is entirely through their own exertions.
     Yet two thirds of them are raised above the station their
     fathers held, and their pretensions are ridiculous. With
     them, however, the enlightened Hindoos seem disposed to
     make common cause. They can effect nothing at present,
     but the _impolicy_, not to say the sin, of withholding
     christian instruction is now beginning to appear.”

In a letter to Mr. Sherer of a somewhat later date, the Archdeacon
mentions other incidents connected with the Hindoo College, which may
here be fitly related.

     “The Hindoo College,” he writes, “has borne some fruit,
     not agreeable to those who planted it. The young men are
     many of them licentious to a degree. The more moral of
     them are scoffers at all that is good. One very clever
     youth, after feasting with his friends on beef, &c. threw
     the bones into a neighbouring Brahmin’s compound.[158] The
     Brahmin and his friends attacked the convivial party, and a
     sad _fracas_ ensued. One of the lads comes often to me, and
     I am not without hopes of him.”

Bishop Turner arrived in Calcutta on the 4th of May 1831, but he
was in a state of health, which excited much apprehension among his
friends. As also, his health continued to decline after his return
to Calcutta, a voyage to Penang and New South Wales was recommended,
in the hope that his valuable life might be prolonged; but the rapid
decay of the Bishop’s strength rendered it necessary for him to
abandon all thoughts of leaving home. On the 29th of June a still
further change for the worse took place; so that Archdeacon Corrie
writes,


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                                   “July 4, 1831.

     “I regret to say that our Bishop is in but a very
     indifferent state. He came back to us early in May
     unwell; and the debility has increased till hope of his
     continuance among us is well nigh taken away. His disease
     is some internal disarrangement. This was excited into
     activity by the fatigue and heat he had to endure whilst
     on his visitation of the other Presidencies. He is dying,
     we fear, of debility, with occasional paroxysms of short
     breathing.... I do not like to give up the hope of his
     living: though it would seem unbrotherly under these
     circumstances, to let a ship go without acquainting you
     with our state. To me the loss would be the greatest I
     have experienced out of my own family. The kindness and
     confidence with which he has treated me, and the benefit
     I have derived from his conversation, must ever be deeply
     felt. To the Indian Church the loss will be greater than
     any yet suffered. He unites the best qualities of his
     predecessors, with the knowledge of the business of a
     clergyman, in the conducting of schools, management of
     charities, &c. &c. Just now [three P. M.] his medical
     attendant reports the Bishop worse. The Lord be gracious to
     this land, and bring light out of this darkness!”

Within three days of the date of this letter, the Indian church was
deprived for the fourth time of its chief Pastor, by the death of
Bishop Turner. Among the Archdeacon’s papers is the following account
of the last illness of the Bishop.

     “On Saturday evening, the 2nd of July, the Bishop first
     spoke to me as if he were not to remain in India. After
     our evening drive I accompanied him up stairs, and he
     indicated a wish that I should sit down with him in the
     drawing-room. ‘He was going to Penang,’ he said, ‘and if
     he did not recover there as he expected, should proceed
     to New South Wales. He now had seen enough of the Diocese
     to judge of the state of religion generally amongst us.
     He thought the state as favourable as, under present
     circumstances, he could well expect. He judged too it would
     be progressive. There is a sad deficiency of clergy, but,
     notwithstanding, many active agents are at work:’ and he
     alluded to several laymen, especially officers, of whom he
     had spoken, as wisely and diligently attending to schools
     in different places he had visited. ‘That no difficulties
     manifested themselves, at present, in the administration
     of ecclesiastical affairs, and that he should leave India
     without anxiety.’

     “2. The Bishop had intended to have crossed the river next
     morning, in order to partake of the Lord’s Supper, in
     Bishop’s College Chapel. I was afraid he might not be able;
     and had made arrangements for the duty at Barrackpore,
     in order to remain with him: as I had, indeed, before,
     from his saying early in June, after he could not go to
     church, ‘these dull Sundays destroy me.’ I had, therefore,
     remained at home two Sundays; and though he said nothing
     on the subject, I had the satisfaction to see that it was
     agreeable to him. On the evening of the 2nd, the Bishop
     said, ‘he felt it would be too much for him to cross the
     river;’ and he gladly assented to my proposal to have
     communion at home, after my return from morning sermon,
     in the Old Church. Accordingly, about half-past-twelve,
     on Sunday, the 3rd, the Bishop, Mrs. Corrie, and Miss
     Bird, assembled in the drawing-room: preparations having
     been previously made. It was a very solemn occasion. He
     was able to kneel only whilst receiving the elements.
     After communicating, Mrs. Corrie left the room, being
     much moved, and unwilling to give him pain by shewing it.
     After a short pause, the Bishop said, ‘How many blessings
     have we to be thankful for?’ ‘I have often enjoyed these
     ordinances in administering them, but a person must be
     in my circumstances to feel the value of them.’ ‘I have
     growing evidence that I know in whom I have trusted:’
     and then went on to contrast the uncertainty attending
     science, with the certainty religion supplies. ‘A little
     knowledge of science,’ he said, ‘makes us confident; but
     as we advance, we feel less certainty; whilst the more we
     advance in religious knowledge, the greater certainty we
     attain.’ I here left the room, and the Bishop continued in
     conversation with Miss B. for some time respecting family
     matters. In the evening, the Bishop retired, for the first
     time, before tea.

     “3. On Monday, he did not leave his room; and his medical
     attendant being now in the house, I merely saw him twice,
     on going into his room to enquire after him. In the evening
     he went out in the _Tonjon_, and spoke to me, on the bank
     of the river, about a marriage which he had been consulted
     upon; but he was soon tired, and retired to his room,
     without coming into the drawing-room.

     “4. On Tuesday, he did not leave his couch. I saw him
     early: he was very unwell; and his medical attendant being
     constantly with him, I did not go into the room again till
     about 4 P. M. He then requested me to make known to Mr.
     Robertson of Bareilly, the state of weakness into which
     it had pleased God to bring him. After which he said, ‘he
     enquired not after Mrs. Corrie, but he felt deeply the
     kindness she had uniformly manifested.’ ‘He desired his
     kind love to her; and that she should be told he felt his
     obligation.’ On my saying that, ‘had he been able to come
     into the drawing-room, she had hoped to see him in the
     evening, and would be glad to come to his room:’ he said
     with emotion, ‘he thought he would rather be spared.’
     ‘He did not,’ he said, ‘speak much to me on the state of
     the diocese; I knew it as well as he did, and in some
     respects better; and added, ‘I say with truth, I feel no
     reluctance to leave things as they are. There was nothing
     of importance claiming immediate attention, and should any
     difficulty arise, you will get over it.’

     “The faithfulness of God to His word was referred to by
     him; and on my mentioning an expression of the late Rev. D.
     Brown, on his death-bed, viz. ‘The Lord’s will is best. His
     way is best. His time is best.’ The Bishop added, ‘that he
     greatly needed the intercession of his friends, that such
     might be his state of mind.’

     “5. In the night of the 5th, [the Bishop] being restless,
     the doctor asked, ‘if he would like me to come and sit
     beside him?’ On his assenting, I was called; I went to
     his bed-side, he took me kindly by the hand and said, ‘he
     feared he interrupted me.’ He then began to say, ‘how happy
     he should be, could he speak to the natives in their own
     tongue;’ and referred to his head-bearer. I offered to
     speak to him in Hindoostanee; but the Bishop said, ‘not
     now, he is fearfully untutored.’ He spoke a good deal on
     subjects of religion, connected with his own state; of the
     insufficiency of learning, talents, &c. &c., without the
     blessing of God; how often God brings about great things
     by small means; and instruments we should not have thought
     of. After about an hour, he asked me to pray with him; then
     said, ‘he would try to compose himself to rest.’

     “6. Wednesday, July 6th, was a day of intense and incessant
     suffering, from difficulty of breathing. He seemed unable
     to attend to any thing; but on Miss B. going into the room,
     he desired her to read to him a Psalm, and conversed about
     a quarter of an hour on points which occurred in reading.
     About 4 o’clock I went into his room: I observed, that ‘I
     feared he had had a trying day.’ He said with emphasis,
     ‘_Very._’

     “On my saying, ‘that when he felt able to attend, if he
     would just express his wishes, I should be glad to wait
     upon him for prayer:’ he assented. He after some time
     observed, in broken sentences, (for his articulation had
     become indistinct) ‘That we do not arrange matters in
     religion sufficiently for ourselves.’ More I could not
     understand. In order to keep up the train of thought, I
     said that ‘our mercy consists in that the covenant is
     ordered in all things and sure.’ He assented, and said,
     ‘but to those who were orderly there might be more of joy
     and peace in believing.’ I said ‘in great bodily distress,
     it seemed to me, there could be little beside a child-like
     reliance on a father’s care and love.’ He said, ‘I have
     an assured hope:’ and added, ‘that we want God to do some
     great thing for us, that shall prevent the necessity of
     humiliation, and closing with Christ.’ After this I read
     a hymn, ‘Jesus the way, the truth, the life.’ He said,
     ‘that one feeling was universal, it pervaded all hearts.’
     In continuation I read the hymn, ‘This God is the God we
     adore;’ and then prayed out of the Visitation of the Sick,
     ending with the Lord’s prayer, and ‘The grace of our Lord,
     &c.,’ to which he added a fervent ‘Amen.’ After a pause,
     the Bishop broke out in prayer: ‘O thou God of all grace,
     stablish, strengthen, settle us. Have mercy on all, that
     they may come to the knowledge of the truth, and be saved.
     There is none other name given by which they _can_ be
     saved. Other foundation can no man lay.’ On his ceasing,
     I added, ‘and this is a _sure_ foundation.’ On which his
     feelings were much moved; and the doctor coming in, our
     conversation ended.

     “In the evening, it was found that the Bishop’s
     articulation had failed. He spoke no more after the above
     recorded prayer, expressing feelings amongst the most
     appropriate that could have occupied the thoughts of a
     dying man. He manifested little, if any, consciousness,
     during the remaining hours he lived; breathing the whole
     time with great difficulty. About ten o’clock he was
     helped from his bed to an easy chair, from which he did
     not again move; nor did he appear to sleep, or to get the
     least repose or cessation from suffering. His appearance
     exhibited the most perfect picture that can be conceived,
     of patient endurance. Not a word or a look indicated a wish
     or a want.

     “7. About half-past-six, he changed for death. I read the
     Commendatory Prayer, and we watched for his departure.
     About half-past-eight, another change came on to a state
     of less suffering, but of more weakness; and the lingering
     spirit took its flight, at a quarter before ten on the
     morning of the 7th of July.”

The Archdeacon appended the following note:

     “I have not inserted the answers I made, on many of the
     occasions here referred to. What is in the third person is
     the substance of what was said; and the words as nearly
     as I could remember them. What are given as the Bishop’s
     words, were spoken as written.”[159]

Having watched over the death-bed of Bishop Turner, there yet
remained to the Archdeacon the afflicting office of preaching the
Funeral Sermon. This he did on Sunday, July 10th; and one who was
present on that occasion related, that the preacher was enabled to
discharge “with firmness and strength of voice, though with deep
feeling,” the mournful duty which had devolved upon him. The estimate
which an almost brotherly intimacy with the deceased enabled the
Archdeacon to form of Bishop Turner’s worth, was thus summed up:--

     “We have left us, in the character of our departed
     Bishop, an example of one who sought glory, honour, and
     immortality, by patient continuance in well-doing. He began
     where the scriptures teach us to begin--with personal
     religion. He had low thoughts of himself. He was seriously
     affected with a sense of his frailties and unworthiness,
     and rested his hope of salvation, only on the mercy of
     God in Jesus Christ. He had attained, in a remarkable
     degree, the spirit of self-controul; so that he was to a
     considerable extent a copy of the great Shepherd and Bishop
     of our souls, whose word is “Learn of me, for I am meek and
     lowly.” He took Revelation for his guide; and whilst the
     Tri-une God of the Bible was the object of his adoration,
     the will of God was the rule of his practice.

     “In his peculiar office he came near to the apostolical
     standard [given] in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus.
     Of his learning, and capacity for perpetuating an order
     of ministers in the church, it would require one of a
     similar measure of learning and piety to speak, but all
     could judge that as a Bishop he was blameless and free
     from reproach. Moderate in all his habits and pursuits.
     Disinterested in a high degree, and free from all suspicion
     of the love of money. He was apt to teach--a true labourer
     in the word and doctrine--sober in judgment--wise to solve
     difficulties--of a compassionate spirit--and heartily
     desirous of men’s eternal good.... The lively sense he had
     of his own responsibility rendered him more keenly alive
     to such defects in any of those under his authority, as
     might hinder their usefulness, or do injury to the cause
     they had solemnly pledged themselves to serve. He felt
     himself bound, therefore, when occasion arose, to reprove
     and to rebuke ‘with all authority.’ An assured hope that
     in being released from the body, he should be with Christ,
     strengthened our departed Prelate to endure protracted and
     intense bodily suffering with patience and fortitude not
     to be surpassed; till at length, being released from this
     strife of nature, he entered into that eternal life to
     which he had long aspired!”

With reference to the death of the Bishop, Archdeacon Corrie also
writes,


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

                                                   “Aug. 6, 1831.

     “At first my mind was more stunned, than by any loss yet
     experienced. It seemed such a mark of divine withdrawing;
     and yet the deceased would have argued the contrary.
     He used to say, that ‘designs which took all at once,
     seldom held a long course:’ and I desire to draw this
     inference,--that seeing the Lord tries us, He will at
     length establish us.”

By the demise of Bishop Turner, the Archdeacon had for the fourth
time to administer the affairs of the diocese. In the letter just
quoted he adds:--

     “I am again Commissary for this See, and feel myself
     adequate to the charge. The routine of duty is familiar
     to me; and I can act with more decision from feeling my
     ground.”

At the same time he had to contend alone with such difficulties as
might occur, there being less of co-operation oftentimes than would
have been desirable. The Archdeacon’s observation on that point in
another letter is, that

     “A Bishop has but to signify his will, and those who do
     not like it, will not oppose it; but with a mere _Locum
     tenens_, friends argue and opposers shew themselves. I do
     what I can to carry friends with me, and overrule, as I am
     able, objectors, or leave them behind. I feel as before
     and more than ever, the undesirableness of power, beyond a
     small measure. Not to recommend measures of emolument &c.,
     to Government, is to ‘act unkindly;’ and to interfere to
     prevent abuses is to be an ‘enemy.’ ... But in nothing have
     I more to be thankful for, than in the strength given me
     to bear these things; persisting at the same time, in the
     measures I think right.”

This kind of wear and tear of body and mind, coupled with separation
from his children and relatives, seems to have very much tended
to foster a desire in the Archdeacon to leave India at the first
opportunity that might warrant such a step. His feelings with regard
to that subject, had indeed been so frequently expressed, in his
own correspondence, and, also, in that of Mrs. Corrie with their
children, that his family fully expected that he would return to
England when the newly-appointed Bishop should arrive in Calcutta. It
was therefore, with reference to this, that he writes


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

                                        “Calcutta, Oct. 22, 1831.

     “I yesterday received a letter from Mr. Goode of Clapham:
     he had seen you a few days before he wrote, and said you
     were expecting that I might be on the way home. I dare
     say I write very differently on the subject at different
     times. To-day we have had rain, and the thermometer being
     only 82°, I feel active; and after all, much of the want of
     elasticity experienced, must perhaps be put to the account
     of years. I know not whether you read Blackwood, but the
     article ‘Christopher North taking a day’s shooting,’
     reminded me of much of the cause of my own ailments. On
     buttoning on his gaiters and preparing for the walk, he
     found his instep had lost something of its spring. This
     is my case, and it would be vain to expect to regain that
     spring, in any country or clime.... What I have sometimes
     thought of, as to coming home, is to leave this about
     January 1833; but circumstances may put it off to 1834,
     even if life be spared.”

Then with reference to what was called the “Reform Bill,” and the
origin of the “Trinitarian Bible Society,” the Archdeacon observes:--

     “All affairs here appear flat, compared with the
     spirit-stirring events that are occurring around you.
     I, on my first voyage, attempted a Poem, beginning with
     something about, ‘Britain, the glory of all lands.’ Parson
     got hold of it, and by his well-deserved raillery cured me
     of the only poetical fit, with which I was ever visited.
     But whether Britain is to continue the glory of all lands,
     appears now to be doubtful. Well: we must look more at the
     Church; of which ‘glorious things’ are still ‘spoken.’
     The part of it called the Church of England, is exposed
     from within as well as from without. Captain Gordon’s
     proceedings, if persisted in, will throw the weight of the
     Bible Society into the dissenting interest, by withdrawing
     the wrong-heads in the church who adhere to him.”

On the same subject the Archdeacon observes


                            TO MR. SHERER.

     “We have heard with much concern of the proceedings of
     Captain Gordon and his friends in the Bible Society: to
     me it indicates the breaking up of the Society, and the
     splitting of the religious world into small, powerless
     parties.... How it grieves one to see men pass by all the
     political patrons, the trafficking beneficiaries, &c., &c.,
     and make this ado about Socinian participation in giving
     away Bibles! The whole of their arguments go on the idea of
     the Bible Society being the _Church_, than which nothing
     can be more vague: not one act of church-membership is
     performed by the Bible Society.”

About the same date the Archdeacon writes


                            TO HIS SISTER.

     “The sound of most of the controversies which occupy you
     at home, reaches us here; and I think there was some
     reason for the accusation against many pious ministers,
     who make sanctification almost the Saviour: whereas
     true and effectual holiness arises from clear views of
     reconciliation to God by Christ. Not theoretical views, but
     that heart-felt sense of the preciousness of the Saviour,
     which only those who experience it can understand, and
     which every believer should seek to realize more and more.
     On the other hand, we have an instance or two of young
     converts entering into this view, so as to go beyond their
     experience, and afterwards to become greatly perplexed.
     May we, dearest sister, learn more and more of that
     expression,--‘The life I live ... I live by the faith of
     the Son of God?’”

Among the important objects which engaged the attention of the late
Bishop Turner, was that of providing additional accommodation for
public worship; and by his lordship’s exertions in that respect,
arrangements had been made for building three additional churches
in and about Calcutta. One of these was designed to be connected
with the Free School; so as not only to enable the whole of the
children in that establishment to attend public worship on the
School premises, but, also, to serve for the accommodation of the
immediate neighbourhood in which the School was situate. Many
circumstances, however, occurred after Bishop Turner’s death to
retard the completion of the Free-School Church, but this having
been at length effected, the Church was opened on Nov. 20, 1831,
the Archdeacon preaching on the occasion, from Matt. xviii. 11. The
sermon was afterwards printed; and on mentioning this in a letter to
his brother, the Archdeacon observes:--

     “I know the Sermon is worth little but for local
     circumstances, and that I have had to contend with some
     cross-grained spirits, since the Bishop’s death, to get the
     Church opened at all. The Sermon will, I hope, counteract
     their misrepresentations with the public.”

Some additional and more striking results of education without
religion, began now to attract attention. Those Hindoo philosophers,
as they were called, who boasted of their desire to rescue their
countrymen from ignorance and superstition, had begun to take
alarm at the freedom with which some of the natives, who had been
educated at the Hindoo College, were attacking the Brahminical faith
and morals. They therefore, somewhat inconsistently, resolved to
hold no communication with any who impugned the Hindoo system; and
went so far as to procure the ejection from house and home, of the
native editor of a paper called “The Enquirer,” because he continued
fearlessly to expose Hindooism. On the other hand, the sceptical and
infidel portion of the Native community, avowed their sentiments
whenever occasion occurred, and acted out their education without
reserve. A curious incident, illustrative of this state of mind
occurred in the December of 1831. A large importation of “Paine’s
Age of Reason” had arrived from America for sale in Calcutta, and
a native bookseller, by way of experiment, fixed the price of the
book at one rupee. At first, a few copies only were sold at this
low price; but the work was found so exactly to fall in with the
principles and tastes of the young enlightened Baboos of Calcutta,
that at the end of five days the bookseller had not a copy of Paine’s
blasphemy left, although the price had been raised to as high as five
rupees the single copy. As was to be expected, moreover, the same
Hindoo liberalists, who persecuted such of their native brethren as
exposed the Brahminical superstition, were ready enough to avail
themselves of an opportunity to shew their hostility to Christianity.
They accordingly had portions of the “Age of Reason,” translated
into Bengalee, and published in one of their newspapers; calling
upon the Christian missionaries at large, and on the Archdeacon by
name, to answer Paine’s infidel lucubrations. Several, however, of
the most respectable of the Hindoos in Calcutta, expressed their
disapprobation of this proceeding, and deprecated all notice of the
publication.

At Christmas-tide the Archdeacon took part in the admission of some
native converts into the Church of Christ. It was on the 26th of Dec.
1831, that the Chapel at Mirzapore was filled with native Christians,
the children from St. James’ and Infant Schools, and the friends of
missions, from Calcutta and neighbourhood. Divine service commenced
by the Native Christians singing a Bengalee hymn; and during Morning
Prayer, the Sacrament of baptism was administered to ten native
adults, and eight native children. At this season, too, it was, that
there was an examination of the schools, and a dinner provided for
the native Christians and their children; of which the following
lively account was given by the Archdeacon


                          TO HIS DAUGHTERS.

     “The christians at the Church-Mission-house, dined all
     together on Monday last. There were 190 who sat down to
     dinner, as they report of the Lord Mayor’s and other such
     feasts; and why may we not say so of this feast, though
     they all sat on the ground? They had, moreover, three
     courses and a desert. Plantain leaves being placed, one
     for each, with a little space between. They then seated
     themselves, each behind this plate of Nature’s manufacture.
     Then came the cooks, and gave, one, a large spoonful of
     rice, another, a portion of vegetable curry. (I should
     premise, there was rice enough for each, placed at once,
     and a small portion of curry.) This latter being discussed,
     a portion of meat-curry was then placed beside the
     remaining rice,--after this, sweet-meats, and then fruit.
     When all were arranged, and ready to begin, Roop, the
     catechist, said a grace;--rather too long, I thought, as, I
     dare say, thought some of the hungry children. They seemed
     all very happy. It was a day of thankfulness to many of
     us. Ten years ago, there was not one christian connected
     with this Mission; now, of these about one hundred and
     fifty are connected with Krishnagur. Some of them residing
     in the neighbouring villages, the remainder were guests,
     connected with other Missions. All were feasted for about
     four pounds, which your papa supplied. There were some
     English friends, too, with Mr. Sandys. We all assembled in
     the Chapel for worship at twelve o’clock, and it was quite
     filled; so that if things prosper, as we hope they will,
     the Chapel must soon be enlarged.”

Except when occasions like these called the Archdeacon from home,
his time was now chiefly spent between Calcutta and Barrackpore.
He appears, too, to have continued the custom originated by the
late Bishop, of allowing any friends who might chuse to attend his
family-worship on Friday-evenings; and to many were those social
meetings the means of instruction. Respecting himself, he observes in
a memorandum, dated

                                    “Barrackpore, April 22, 1832.

     “On the 10th of this month, I completed 55 years. Great
     mercies on the part of God, great ingratitude on my part,
     appear in review. Such has been my history throughout. I
     do not look on it as a thing of course, but as a proof of
     the inveterate nature of human depravity; and as setting
     forth the unutterable condescension and love of God, the
     Saviour. I would not have it continue; whilst I am sure
     if left to myself it will continue, and continuing must
     exclude me from Heaven. My expectation, and my desire
     is, to be saved from sin; and I thank God, through Jesus
     Christ, that thus it will be. The prospect before me, if
     life be spared, is full of anxiety. I feel very reluctant
     to quit India. I had intended to have spent my life here;
     but that implied an useful life. My present appointment has
     operated to make my defects more manifest. Who would have
     thought, when I was glad of release from the duties of the
     Presidency, (being from debility unable to perform them,)
     that so much publicity would have followed? Who could have
     calculated on the Bishops being removed, one after another?
     This is the Lord’s doing. If I have not brought discredit
     on my religious profession, it is also of Him. He has
     hid me in ‘the secret of his pavilion’: I feel this most
     sensibly.”

The Archdeacon’s correspondence shews that the anxiety here expressed
respecting the future, was much increased by the accounts which
reached India of that turbulent spirit, which now pervaded England;
and which had been called forth and fostered by unprincipled
men; who, in the absence of arguments, derived from truth and
righteousness, in favour of their schemes of reform, did not scruple
to recommend the use of the brick-bat and the bludgeon. Thus in
writing


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                                 “April 25, 1832.

     “The overland news have reached us up to the 13th January.
     Very troublous times seem coming over you. May the Lord
     avert or guide the storm, as He surely will! But who may
     be swept away in its violence, who can say? What anxiety
     you must have experienced about Lucy during the riots at
     Bristol! And now again burnings have commenced in various
     parts. These things make the prospect Englandwards very
     dreary, and add to the natural indecision of my mind as to
     what it may be right to do, respecting having our children
     here, or going to them. Yet I expect and confidently
     believe, that when the time comes our path will be plain.”

And with reference to the same subject he writes


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

     “The rejection of the Reform Bill by the House of Lords,
     seems very disastrous. I think they did their duty, but the
     late promotions in the Church look as if the proverb were
     about to be realized, ‘Quem Deus vult perdere &c.’ What
     can result from the influence of such men but laxity of
     doctrine and of practice, and changes in every department?
     Change may be required in some things, but they should
     be men who fear God and reverence his word, who make
     the changes. Well: _the Church_ shall stand to which we
     belong. The Rock, Christ, is not to be shaken by these
     convulsions.--Yet these troubles in Old England distress
     me much, not only for the sake of the land of my fathers,
     but as affecting the determination I shall be obliged to
     come to, if spared a few months longer, as to return or not
     return to you. Sometimes friends here say, I shall have
     the offer of becoming Bishop, or one of the Bishopricks
     of India. This I do not myself think; or when the thought
     occurs, it creates only fear lest the offer should be
     made.... Ever since I left college, present duties have
     required present exertion; and if I have any reputation for
     discretion, it is, because like the owl, I have preserved
     silence on points on which I was ignorant. With these true
     thoughts of myself, every occasion of publicity has brought
     me only secret humiliation; with, at times, overflowing
     feelings of thankfulness to God, who ‘out of the mouths
     of babes ordains praise.’ But now my secret desire is for
     privacy. This perhaps, is at the bottom, after all, of that
     hankering I feel after what I always called Home. Though
     England since our father’s death, presents no [particular]
     home to my mind, the Island generally is home; and should
     it be the will of God that I come among you, a small circle
     will bound my affections. And yet I should soon love all
     those whom my brothers and sister love, and all who have
     shewn kindness to the children of our love. But when I
     should be loosing my cords and preparing to take down the
     earthly house of this tabernacle, I may be in danger of
     becoming more attached to the passing scene. So, after all,
     there is no safety but in fearing always.

     “All things here continue much as usual, except indeed,
     that the great reductions in the army have led to the
     display in several parts of the country of a disposition
     to plunder and to insurrection. It is not, I apprehend,
     from dissatisfaction with this more than with any other
     government, which might have been in possession. But it
     is human nature unrestrained by the outward or inward
     influence of Christianity: and our men in authority will
     not learn, how much they owe to the Gospel, even as it
     respects this life, in restraining the evil passions of
     mankind. A small offering to the idol, of any plunder
     gained, sanctifies the remainder to the possessors: and now
     that so much country is left without the presence of any
     military force, why should not the natives help themselves
     to whatever is within reach? This is the spirit at work in
     much of this land.”

Meanwhile the preaching of the gospel was not without effect, for the
Archdeacon was able to inform


                             MR. SHERER.

                                                   “July 7, 1832.

     “In our mission this year, 108 have been added to the
     Church, of whom seventy-two are adults; and there is a
     growing willingness in the natives to listen to the Gospel.
     We have a converted Jew,[160] also, seeking the welfare of
     the lost sheep of the house of Israel; and Mr. Wolff is
     in the Punjab on his way hither. He has been imprisoned,
     bastindoed, made to work as a slave, and scarcely reached
     Peshawar alive; but now Runjeet Singh, hearing of his
     connection by marriage with the Governor General, has sent
     him a guard of honour; and he who was yesterday literally a
     beggar, finds himself treated as a prince.”

In the following month the Archdeacon had the happiness to witness
the baptism of one of those native youths, who have been already
mentioned in connection with the Hindoo College in Calcutta;[161]
and of whom several, by attending the lectures of Mr. Duff and Mr.
Hill, on the Evidences of Religion, had been led into a belief of the
truth of the Bible, as a revelation from God. The youth in question
was baptised in the Old Church on the 26th of August, and soon after
became a student in Bishop’s College. The decided preference,
however, which this youth and others evidenced for the Church of
England, seems to have occasioned much annoyance to many, of whom
better things might have been hoped.

     “The Baptists,” as the Archdeacon writes to his sister,
     “did all they could to prejudice them [the native youths]
     against us: so that when the youth referred to, came to
     talk over the Baptismal service, all the usual objections
     were familiar to him; but he was satisfied with the
     explanations so often rendered of them. These,” adds
     the Archdeacon, “are little refreshments amidst much to
     depress us: for the spirit which is abroad in England, is
     also spreading here. Many are not only disposed to favour
     dissent, but to discourage the Church. Here, where are no
     tithes or exactions to complain of, we might expect to be
     let alone. But no: we must be pulled down, if possible,
     from the elevation we have gained. Our Governor General and
     his Lady have done much towards this, by going alike nearly
     to Church and meeting; so Mr. J. Hill publishes a book to
     explain, as he professed, the principles of Independency,
     but it is in reality a collection of the bitterest things
     which have been uttered from time to time, against
     Establishments in general, and the Church of England in
     particular. It has however, answered his end with few or
     none; whilst it has exposed to many the bitterness they
     would not believe could dwell under so meek an exterior.”

So again the Archdeacon in writing to his brother observes:--

     “Here we have no tithes, no collection of Church-dues, to
     call forth ill feeling. We interfere in no way but in our
     religious character, yet this offends.”

It might truly be said that there was “much to depress” the spirit
of a Christian, when such persons as Mr. Hill professed to be, could
have so carefully treasured up, to be poured forth as occasion
served, “the bitterest things which had been uttered against the
Church of England;” because such a proceeding must have given reason
for doubting the religious sincerity of the parties themselves.
(Phil. i. 15; 1 Cor. xiii. 1-3.) Whatever evils might have been
connected with “establishments in general, and with the Church of
England in particular;” no person with truth could charge those
evils upon that Church in India. On the contrary, it was impossible
to overlook the extensive good which our Church was at that moment
effecting, in every corner of the Eastern empire; and that by means
of funds as unconnected with the State, as Mr. Hill himself could
have desired. If history and experience therefore, had not explained,
that it was Episcopacy and not Establishments that called forth the
sad exhibition of Independency of which the Archdeacon complained,
this outbreak of Mr. Hill and his friends must have appeared most
unaccountable. The Archdeacon therefore, being fully aware that
the question to be decided was, “The office of the ministry, is it
of Christ, or only by the suffrages and allowance of the people?”
reprinted, (but without any allusion to Mr. Hill’s book,) Hey’s tract
on the three-fold ministry of the New Testament; and as subsidiary
to this tract, Dr. Mill printed Chillingworth on the Apostolical
institution of Episcopacy. Both were eagerly read, and many who
scarcely knew the difference between the Church and dissent, had now
their eyes effectually opened. Amidst such causes for sorrow, there
were counterbalancing occasions for rejoicing. In the letter to his
sister already referred to, the Archdeacon writes:

     “I am not without fruit in my own sphere. Several
     respectable Mahommedans have come most mornings, for some
     months past, to read the scriptures with me. Two of them
     were baptised about a month since, and two are to be
     baptised to-morrow (Sep. 5.) and new enquirers are often
     appearing; so that there seems a prospect of a native
     Church being gathered from that class, in time.”

The baptisms here spoken of as expected to occur, took place in
the mission-chapel at Mirzapore on the 5th of September. One
of the parties baptised was a young person of talent and great
respectability, who had gone through the usual course of education
at the Mahommedan College, with a view to his becoming a Molwee.
The sacrament was administered by the Archdeacon, who conducted the
service in Hindoostanee. After the baptism, he addressed the European
portion of the congregation, exhorting them “to take heed, lest
whilst the natives of India were thus entering into the kingdom of
God, they, the professors of the Christian name, should come short of
everlasting life.”


      [153] Writers.

      [154] Chief station.

      [155] Respecting the revolution which placed Louis
            Philippe on the throne.

      [156] Nothing could be worse than the state of the Native
            press about this time. Besides papers published in
            English, there were nine or ten in the Bengalee
            language, some of which contained the most polluting
            language and sentiments.

      [157] These were the Anglo-Indians, who, for some time
            past, had been clamouring for political privileges.

      [158] It will be remembered that animals of the ox-tribe
            are sacred among the Hindoos; so that whilst the
            “feasting on beef” manifested the greatest contempt
            for Hindooism on the part of the youths; no greater
            insult and profanation could have been inflicted on
            the Brahmin than to have ox-bones thrown into his
            premises.

      [159] Some notices of Bishop Turner are collected in the
            Missionary Register, for March and May 1832.

      [160] Mr. Samuel.

      [161] See above pp. 494, et seq.




                            CHAPTER XIX.

     ARRIVAL OF BISHOP WILSON.--BAPTISM OF
       NATIVES.--ORDINATIONS.--VISITATION OF THE UPPER PROVINCES.


The Rev. Daniel Wilson had been consecrated to the See of Culcutta
early in this year, and was now approaching the shores of India. It
appears that on his appointment to the See, Dr. Wilson had written to
Archdeacon Corrie to inform him of that circumstance, and had kindly
taken occasion to express a desire that the Archdeacon would for
the present continue his services in India. With reference to this
estimable prelate the Archdeacon writes


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

     “Dr. Wilson has not yet arrived, but is daily expected. I
     know no one more suitable to have been sent among us, but
     our expectation must be from God alone. It would cost me a
     severe pang were I told I should not be allowed to visit
     England again, yet the prospect of remaining here is not
     painful to me; and it is chiefly on our children’s account
     that I have thought of retiring.... You are not likely to
     know, unless I tell you, that Mr. Charles Grant has written
     me a very kind letter, stating why I was not called home to
     be made Bishop.... I am more than satisfied, for I desire
     not the office. I have felt a measure of the responsibility
     attached to it; experienced what it is to be set on an high
     place ‘as a mark for envy to shoot at;’ and above all, I
     know to a demonstration how much more such men as the last,
     or the present Bishop can effect, beyond my utmost ability.”

That it might meet his lordship as soon as he should arrive in India,
the Archdeacon addressed the following letter


                      TO THE BISHOP OF CALCUTTA.

                                                   “Oct. 2, 1832.

     “The news of your appointment to India, reached this
     country at the latter end of July, and caused thanksgivings
     to ascend from many hearts. Your two kind letters did not
     reach me till September 21, so that the time had passed for
     addressing a letter to the Cape. This will, we hope, meet
     you before the end of this month, on the Sibbald’s entering
     the River, and in good health, and without disaster on the
     voyage. Our hearty congratulations are offered, and prayers
     that your entrance in among us, may be ‘in the fulness of
     the blessing of the Gospel!’

     “From what you are reported to have said at the Church
     Missionary Society’s anniversary meeting, it would appear
     that you had been led to expect that arrears of business
     await you, to be arranged: I am happy to say that not
     a case, that I am aware of, is in arrear; that though
     much interesting business connected with our public
     institutions, will claim your attention, nothing in the
     way of official arrangement remains for your decision. I
     am most happy to observe your intention of endeavouring
     to preserve health. Our former Bishops no doubt had the
     same purpose, but they did not take advice from those
     more used to the climate. I shall, please God we meet,
     explain to you how both Bishops Heber and Turner brought
     on, inadvertently, their own end. There is nothing in
     the climate to prevent most constitutions continuing,
     with care, to enjoy good health. At the same time, it has
     appeared to me that no particular age is more favorable
     than another; or that there is any such thing as becoming
     inured to the climate, so as to bear exposure at certain
     times. Experience teaches us to avoid certain situations
     and not to expose ourselves [to the climate] at certain
     times, if we can avoid it; and this is all, in my opinion,
     that any one gains by long residence here. All this will
     soon become familiar to you; and I have no doubt, under
     usual circumstances, you will be able to go through all
     your duties with comfort....

     “I shall say nothing of my own affairs, except that I was
     not intending to leave the country this year; and that it
     will be my delight, as well as duty, to be assisting in
     every way I can.”

On the report reaching Calcutta that the “Sibbald” had arrived in the
river, the Archdeacon, as on like former occasions, obtained the use
of one of the government vessels, met the Bishop, and conveyed him to
Calcutta. His lordship arrived there on the 4th of November, and was
installed on the next day.

The Archdeacon was thus relieved from some of those anxieties which
were connected with official duties, but he was not without trials
of a domestic nature. The ship in which his wife had embarked for
England in the middle of December, was wrecked off Coringa, on her
passage to Madras, and the passengers only saved by taking to the
long-boat. They ultimately landed at Masulipatam, and the fatigue
and exposure to the cold which Mrs. Corrie and the other passengers
underwent, proved of no lasting detriment to them; but all their
luggage was lost.

A letter addressed to his wife soon after her departure from India
will give some idea of the nature of the Archdeacon’s occupations at
this time:--

                                                “January 6, 1833.

     “The last few days have furnished increasing occupation. On
     Wednesday I breakfasted with the Bishop, and arranged with
     him for the examination of the candidates for Ordination.
     I then went to Da Costa, who has been too ill to leave
     home, and corrected two proof sheets of Isaiah, in Persian,
     and two of the New Testament in Hindoostanee. I returned
     home at two o’clock, when the Natives, who read the
     Scriptures with me, occupied me till four. On Thursday I
     was occupied nearly the whole of the day in writing to G.
     on his offence; and in the evening the Bishop dined with
     your mother and I, and we talked over Church affairs. On
     Friday, there was a meeting of the High School managers, to
     appoint Lambrick _pro-tem_, head, and young Thompson second
     master. I then went to the examination, of Native Schools
     at Mirzapore, the best by far we have had: Dunsmore their
     superintendent. This kept me till 2 o’clock. I came home
     and found the candidates’ papers for my inspection, which
     by close application I got through by dusk. I then went to
     A. S. to dinner at six, and from thence to the town-hall,
     to the Bible Association general meeting, at half past
     7 o’clock, and home at ten. The Bishop took the chair,
     Bannerjee spoke well, but too long. Yesterday I wrote two
     public letters, and prepared notes of an address which the
     Bishop wished me to make to the candidates for Ordination,
     and their duties as they related to this country. At four
     I went to the Molwee’s, and conversed awhile with about a
     dozen natives on John iii., and then came home to dinner.
     Now for some fragments. A Moonshee is to be baptised on
     Wednesday, who many years ago received a New Testament
     at Dacca. He cannot remember the date, but it was from
     the Chaplain who was there before S. He has been reading
     this, and enquiring at different places; till at length,
     convinced of the divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ, he
     wishes to take up his Cross. He appears more spiritual than
     the Molwee; but you know we must not too readily trust
     appearances. He has a wife, who, he says, is persuaded
     also, and they have two children.

     “Past 2 o’clock--We have been detained at the Cathedral
     till now, and have had a most instructive discourse from
     the Bishop, Acts xxii. The Ordination of two deacons
     and seven priests altogether, is indeed a new sight in
     Calcutta. The Cathedral was crowded, and the service full
     of interest. At the Communion afterwards, one hundred and
     fifteen attended. Many appeared deeply affected.”

Mrs. Corrie having proceeded from Masulipatam to Madras, the
Archdeacon obtained leave to join her there, with a view to arrange
for her passage to England by another ship. He was consequently
absent from Calcutta until the beginning of March. On the 9th of that
month he writes:--


                             TO HIS WIFE.

     “I found things here of a mixed nature; some pleasing, some
     painful. Of the pleasing was the baptism of twenty-five
     Hindoos in Mirzapore chapel, on the evening I arrived. The
     Hindoostanee congregation much increased. A fine youth of
     about eighteen, the son of an Englishman, but abandoned
     by the father, has with his Mother, sought instruction.
     He is dressed as a Mahommedan. Another youth of the same
     description, was confirmed, but I have not yet seen him.”

Some particulars of the then state of society, which the Archdeacon
communicated in a letter to Mr. Sherer, may not be omitted:--

                                                 “March 30, 1833.

     “You will learn from other sources the great distress which
     prevails through the failure of the great houses here.
     One point of retribution I cannot but think is observable
     in the recoil of the Free-trade system. They were the
     men who maintained the Hurkcaru and India Gazette, to
     vilify the Company and to run down the Government; and
     just in proportion as they injured the interests of the
     Company, their own were injured.... Of public matters you
     will, also, hear. We have now a newspaper at Cawnpore, at
     Meerut, Agra, and Delhi. The Delhi paper has an article
     on the misconceptions of the Natives, shewing how easily
     they are led away by rumours, &c.; which seems to point
     out the impolicy of these very newspapers. The subject
     of Missions is daily gaining ground; yet opposition is
     at work underhand. Paine’s ‘Age of Reason’ has been
     circulated to a large extent among the educated Hindoos;
     and a very plausible work written here, but printed in
     England, entitled ‘Christianity of human origin,’ has got
     considerable currency.”

It was during the March of this year that the Archdeacon, among
others, resigned his office of governor of the Free-School in
Calcutta. For a considerable period the affairs of the school had
been a source of contention at the Presidency, in consequence of
a difference of opinion between the governors and the committee
of that Institution, respecting the management of the charity. It
was therefore at length agreed that the points at issue should be
submitted to the arbitration of the Bishop, it being at the same time
understood that his lordship’s award should be final. One portion of
the award was that the governors and secretary of the school should
resign their office, in order thus to allow of such a reconstruction
of the government of the School as might seem calculated to compose
the existing differences. The Bishop himself led the way, by
resigning his office of Patron; and the Archdeacon readily followed
so disinterested an example.

Soon after this, the Bishop of Calcutta decided that the Archdeacon
should make a visitation of the Upper Provinces. An application
was accordingly made to government for the purpose of obtaining
travelling allowances for the occasion; and early in May an Order
to that effect passed the Council. Before leaving Calcutta the
Archdeacon relates


                             TO HIS WIFE.

                                                   “June 9, 1833.

     “The subject of Infant-Schools is to be taken up by the
     Bishop. Yesterday most of our friends among the Chaplains
     breakfasted with him, and a meeting was resolved on, to
     be called next Monday at the Bishop’s. Lord and Lady W.
     are full, also, of the subject, and are to give largely,
     &c. A central school is to be built, and a Master and
     Mistress to be sent for from England; so that the little
     one on which you bestowed so much care, and which Mr. U.
     let die a kind of natural death, is to be succeeded by
     a magnificent offspring (shall I call it?); and Bishop
     Turner will yet speak to the place in this way, though
     his name be forgotten. A meeting, also, is called to
     forward steam-communication, which has been taken up anew
     at Bombay; and Lord W. is, also, aiding individually; and
     we are to have answers to our Letters in four or five
     months, if not to have leave of absence for six months,
     with permission to visit Clapham, without loss of pay or
     _batta_. Such are the topics of the day.”

In the same letter the Archdeacon mentions an occurrence which will
not be read without interest:--

     “One of the youths who was to have been baptized on
     Whit-sunday, was seized in the street, by his relatives,
     and carried home to Bunhoogly. He had been there confined
     in a room for fifteen days, threatened, and was to have had
     a maddening potion administered to him, but for the cries
     and entreaties of his mother, whose love for the fruit
     of her womb prevailed over her superstition. The youth
     bribed a servant to carry a letter to Bannerjee,[162] and
     he with young Henry R. went in a palanquin carriage on
     the Berhampore road, on Sunday Evening the 2nd, when the
     lad escaped; fled to the appointed place of meeting, and,
     getting into the carriage, was brought to Mirzapore. A
     rich uncle, one of the Dutts, came on Friday last with a
     Brahmin, and tried to coax the lad away again; promising
     him all sorts of liberty, and every thing, but leave to
     become a christian. The youth stedfastly refused. On
     this a complaint was lodged at the Police office against
     Bannerjee, charging him with violently carrying off the
     lad, but they could not sustain the charge, and the case
     was dismissed: and here the matter rests at present. He is
     a very intelligent lad of sixteen, but short of his age. I
     had an interesting conversation with him on Sunday evening,
     too long to write to you, but the substance of it was as
     follows: ‘A full conviction of the truth of Christianity.
     Its suitableness to mankind as revealing a Saviour, and the
     lad’s own individual need of pardon of sin, and of grace
     and strength to bear his trials, and to obey God.’ The poor
     fellow was very feverish from the agitation he had gone
     through. Mr. S. was preparing tea for him, and he slept in
     one of S’s room for security. How little we know of such
     difficulties in the way of salvation! Our ease and levity
     are equal impediments, and perhaps sources of greater
     danger.”

The youth mentioned in the foregoing letter was named Brijonaut
Ghose, and had been educated at the Hindoo College, but afterwards
became a pupil at the Mirzapore school, under Krishna Mohun
Bannerjee. There, it appears, he was in the habit of conversing
freely with his companions respecting the follies of Hindooism, and
this having reached the ears of his parents, they became apprehensive
that their son would embrace Christianity, and so forbade his
attendance at the school. His absence was not particularly noticed
at the time; but on his returning again after some time had elapsed,
he stated the reason for his absence, and shewed a greater desire
for instruction in the great truths of revelation. The opposition
to his attending at Mirzapore, now became more decided on the part
of this youth’s parents: they took him to their home, confined him
to the house, and had him carefully watched for several days. The
youth, however, contrived to escape, and instantly went to Mirzapore;
but as the friends of that Institution were, for every reason,
anxious not to make converts by stratagem, it was decided that a
temporary residence should be provided for the youth, and a Brahmin
provided to dress his food, that he might not lose caste. But before
a residence could be obtained, the youth was again captured by his
relations, and subjected to the treatment which the Archdeacon’s
letter relates. So soon, therefore, as ever the youth found himself
rescued from the unnatural violence of his parents, he earnestly
desired to be baptized. And as there was no doubt respecting his
fitness for baptism, so far as concerned his knowledge of the Gospel,
and the sincerity of his faith in its promises, there seemed, at
first, to be no reason for disappointing his desire; especially as
baptism would effect a complete separation of the youth from his
relatives, and thus prove a certain protection against their future
persecution. To prevent, however, any suspicion that so solemn a rite
had been hastily administered, or that the Missionaries had acted
from unworthy motives, it was considered better that the baptism of
the youth should be deferred. But in the meanwhile the father of
the youth obtained a writ of _Habeas Corpus_ from the Supreme Court
in Calcutta, calling upon Bannerjee to produce Brijonaut Ghose,
and to shew cause why he was detained at Mirzapore or elsewhere.
Bannerjee, of course, appeared in Court with the youth, and stated,
through the Advocate General, all the circumstances connected with
the youth’s history. The Court, however, decided that the parents
were the natural guardians of their children, and the youth was
therefore ordered to be delivered up to his father. It was in vain
that the youth personally expressed his unwillingness to return
home, and alleged his dread of the repetition of the violence which
he had already experienced: the Court did not feel called upon to
interfere until the dreaded violence had been actually offered; and
consequently reiterated the order for the boy to be given up to the
father. The poor fellow was then seized hold of by his father; but
it required considerable exertion to get him out of court. He wept
most bitterly, repeated his appeals to the judges, seized hold of the
table at which the barristers were seated, and was only dragged away
inch by inch.

This unusual scene gave rise, as it will be concluded, to much
discussion, and in its probable consequences was of no ordinary
importance: it occurred on the day on which the Archdeacon left
Calcutta; who in announcing his intended journey to his brother,
observes:--

     “My visitation out and home, will embrace a circle of
     between 2000 and 3000 miles. I have no fear as to health;
     and for the rest, I have the word of truth, ‘I will be with
     thee in all places whithersoever I shall lead thee.’”

Full particulars of the Archdeacon’s proceedings are contained in his
letters to the present Bishop of Calcutta, and in his correspondence
with Mrs. Corrie: it is from both these sources that the following
information is derived;--

     “On the 13th July, 1833, I went to Chinsurah, and found
     dear B. on the steps of the Church to receive me. Passed
     a peaceful day on the 14th with him. Having been less at
     ease for want of repose, I enjoyed Saturday as much bodily
     as mentally. On Sunday morning I preached to the soldiers:
     and in the evening B.; there was a collection made both
     times for the Church Missionary Society of about 100 Rs.
     The church in the evening was nearly as full as in the
     morning. Captain J. came up to see a friend, and passed an
     hour on Sunday with me; he breakfasted with us on Monday
     morning; and he and B. came on with me to Bandel. I thought
     much of the many partings we have had in these places.
     Beloved Mr. Brown came up with Martyn and Parsons and me
     to Forsyth’s here in 1806;[163] and again with Parsons and
     me in November of that year. M. and Miss C. and I paid F.
     a visit here in 1812. Now where are most of these? Their
     place others fill. Yet the work of the Lord goes forward!

     “I consider my journey now commenced. The weather is
     favourable; the wind fair and steady till toward evening,
     but not strong; and very cloudy.

     “Reached Santipore, July 16th, and expected to be at Culna
     by breakfast time. Arrived at Culna by nine. Mr. A. came
     down to the boat, and we afterward went up to the Mission
     bungalow and staid till evening. Their mode of life is just
     what people at home fancy of Missionary life in India; the
     house was clean and airy; the children are kept in such
     order as Christian children should be, playful yet obedient.

     “I was nearly a day sooner than was expected; only two of
     the four schools were sent for to be examined, and of them
     only the first classes, and a few of the second. There were
     forty-one boys: they read with great correctness the 6th of
     St. Matthew: and generally gave correct explanations from
     notes supplied to each school by Mr. A., explanatory of
     what they read. They read with equal correctness Ellerton’s
     Dialogues, 5th Ch:, and are expert in their explanations;
     the whole of this book the boys had read; it is a great
     favourite among the scholars; and a few days since four
     youths, who had been educated in these schools, came to Mr.
     A. and requested a copy of each of the Dialogues for their
     private use.

     “Mr. A. has a school of sixteen girls in one of the rooms
     of the bungalow; one of them a few months since was, with
     her mother’s consent, baptized. There is also an English
     class of about thirty; their proficiency was not so
     manifest. The teacher is a Mahomedan, who learned English
     at some school in the Chitpore road. Mr. A. speaks of a
     great and favourable change in the respectable natives
     towards him. This appears among other things, in some
     wealthy people, who had set up a school in opposition to
     one of the mission schools, having, after some conversation
     with him on Christianity, given up their school, and sent
     the boys to his. Culna is a great mart for grain, so that
     tracts are carried from this to many distant parts of the
     country, and Mr. A. speaks of strangers, who come to the
     market, as desirous of obtaining tracts to carry away with
     them. In the evening twenty-one of the native Christians
     attended for worship. Mr. A. leads the psalmody with his
     violin, just loud enough to keep them in tune; the effect
     was very pleasing.

     “July 18th.--We crossed the river, after leaving the
     mission house, for freer air. Mr. A. came with me. It
     reminded me of our visit with the late Bishop, when he had
     in like manner crossed the river with us. We spoke of him
     with much affection, and especially of the good judgment
     displayed in his remarks on Missionary operations. In the
     night there was much rain; but yesterday the wind was
     fair, and steady without rain, as far as Nuddea. I staid
     at the mouth of the Jellinghee an hour, expecting that Mr.
     R. might have come from Krishnaghur to the neighbouring
     factory to meet me, as I had written to him about my plans
     from Chinsurah. He was not come, nor is it of consequence,
     as I could not have gone at that time to see the Nuddea
     school. We proceeded very slowly, yet reached a point
     near the factory with the upper-roomed house. There was
     a fine plain covered with growing rice. A clever-looking
     young brahmin, in part owner of the field, came up to
     make salaam. I engaged him in conversation by setting
     the young baboo to ask him questions; no good seemed to
     follow; but on the passage “_Come unto me, all ye that
     labour and are heavy laden_,” &c. being read, I observed,
     that if the brahmin would admit, that sin is a burden,
     it would make him uneasy; so that I feared he would put
     away the invitation. He became thoughtful, and left us a
     little seriously. The 18th passed rather uncomfortably. I
     had called the moonshee, and had just commenced reading
     the 1st of Acts with him, when we began to move round and
     round! The river had made on both sides a deep indent into
     the bank; and the water was boiling like a whirlpool.
     After some time the dandies made the side; but the river
     ran a perfect sluice. I got on shore, and after two or
     three trials the pinnace was dragged with much difficulty
     out of this situation. But for a mile, the river ran
     with like violence; and I had to walk all that way; the
     day was clear and the heat great; I had a chattah, and
     walked no faster than the dandies, who were bending to
     the earth almost in their endeavour to drag the pinnace
     on. I abstained from water though exceedingly thirsty;
     and only moistened my mouth with a wet towel, and after
     an hour’s repose felt no inconvenience. The river still
     ran very strong, and has been very tortuous since passing
     the Jellinghee. About twelve a heavy fall of rain came on;
     the men fastened the pinnace slightly to the bank; and
     all came on board for shelter. This continued till three,
     when we set off again, and a strong wind springing up, we
     made head against the torrent. The rush through the water
     was by no means pleasant; but we were mercifully brought
     to a quiet resting-place about half-past-six, P. M.; the
     wind died away and we had a cool refreshing night. During
     the day at intervals, I had much conversation with the
     moonshee on points of religion in which he is interested.
     We read also two chapters of the Acts, and conversed much
     on the contents. There is little expectation left of our
     reaching Berhampore on the 20th, which I much regret. It
     is His pleasure, however, who is the God of Providence, as
     well as of Grace. The river is now rising rapidly; and as
     it has not yet overflowed its banks, we have to contend
     against the whole strength of the stream, especially at
     every turning. On the 19th our progress was small. About
     eight A. M. heavy rain came on, so as quite to obscure the
     horizon: this detained us till near noon. We tracked when
     the wind lulled; small rain fell till near four P. M., when
     the wind rose, but not fair for us. At length at Dewan
     Gunge the course became fair, when we fell again upon a
     whirlpool; but the wind carried us slowly through, and with
     some exertion we reached a point near Cutwa.

     “I was here strongly reminded of my first visit in 1806,
     when I walked through the sun from Dewan Gunge to visit
     Chamberlain.[164] The matted bungalow, his first wife’s
     tomb, visible as we sat at table, and the delicate little
     girl, the daughter of that wife, sitting by him, and his
     mourning for the recent loss of his second wife, and
     the melancholy all these circumstances cast upon our
     conversation, were vividly called to my mind. Then his
     primitive mode of living, vegetable curry, and spring
     water, gave me a feeling of veneration for his character.
     I well remember too how in the evening Parson’s lively
     conversation cheered him and he came on the next day with
     us to Plassey. At parting we sang Chamberlain’s much used
     hymn, “O’er the gloomy hills of darkness, &c.” I well
     remember the energy with which he used to sing. He is now
     singing the ‘new song’ in livelier strains, and his work
     has not fallen to the ground. The moonshee could not come
     on, on account of the rain. It is subject of much regret
     to find myself on the evening of the 20th ten coss from
     Berhampore by land, and not less than fifteen distant by
     water. But I am not conscious of having lost an hour since
     I left Chinsurah. If I could have foreseen the obstacles,
     which have arisen from the winding course and strength
     of the stream and failure of wind, I might have passed
     without visiting Culna, but these reflections are now in
     vain. May I but have wisdom and strength to improve such
     opportunities as may present themselves at Berhampore!

     “I arrived at Berhampore in the forenoon of the 22nd July,
     and called on the chief military person and made known my
     purpose of remaining over the following Sunday.

     “On Tuesday forenoon I inspected with Col. T. the place
     newly appropriated for divine service. It is fitted up with
     pews for seventy or eighty of the upper classes, and with
     benches for the private soldiers. It is supplied also with
     two chandeliers of eighteen lights each, and abundance of
     wall shades for evening service.

     “On Wednesday I examined all the classes in the regiment
     school, consisting of sixty boys and forty-two girls.
     The upper classes read their scripture lesson with
     distinctness and propriety, and were pretty ready in
     Crossman’s Catechism: this was their chief attainment.
     In the regimental library there are between 300 and 400
     volumes of a miscellaneous kind; few treating of religious
     subjects. To keep up the library, sergeants subscribe four
     annas a month, corporals and privates one. There are 213
     subscribers. The Christian Knowledge Society’s library is
     confined chiefly to the hospital. On Thursday forenoon I
     called on some of the Civil servants, and on Friday visited
     the hospital, and read to and exhorted the more dangerously
     sick. Mr. M. arrived to-day; but went at once, being very
     poorly, to Mr. P’s house, which is about two miles from the
     barracks. On Saturday morning I made some preparation for
     the following day. At half-past-six A. M. on Sunday, (the
     28th of July) the regiment was marched to church. There are
     in the whole 700 men, of whom about half are Protestants,
     and some of these being on duty, those who attend are very
     sufficiently accommodated, which was by no means the case
     in the place formerly used for their assembling. Mr. M. was
     too unwell to assist, so that I had the morning service
     on my hands, and the sacrament, of which notice had been
     circulated: twenty persons attended. At half-past-three
     P. M. about thirty convalescent out of the forty-two sick
     assembled in the ward of the hospital. In the evening Mr.
     M. read prayers. There were about 150 soldiers present; and
     all the pews were occupied as in the morning.

     “These are the principal events in the way of duty which
     occupied me at Berhampore. A station school would be very
     desirable for the many poor Christian children, unconnected
     with the army; but in the absence of a chaplain, and from
     my own inability to endure the exertion, and indeed from
     want of time, nothing was done towards such an object. I
     had much pleasure in renewing acquaintance with several I
     had known up the country; but could benefit them little,
     being always made unwell by the morning’s exertion. The
     wind has almost quite failed these two days, which renders
     the heat more oppressive.

     “There is a mission here of the London Society. Mr. H. has
     been at Berhampore several years, and is much respected.
     The success among the natives has been very limited; but
     he is very diligent in endeavouring to make the truth
     known, preaching once or twice a day in their bazaars and
     villages.”

In a letter to Mrs. Corrie dated “on the Ganges,” August 1st. the
Archdeacon, after having given a detailed account of his equipments,
&c. adds:--

     “Now for my companion. He is a baptized Hindoo, of
     respectable, though not wealthy connections; was educated
     at Mr. Hare’s school; attended first Mr. Derosario, and
     afterwards Mr. Duff: became a teacher in Mr. Duff’s school,
     and was finally baptized in the Scotch congregation. He is
     now on the way to Futtyghur; R. is Judge, and a pious young
     doctor M. with him have established a school, and wish for
     a native christian teacher. Well: this youth, by name,
     Gopy Nath Mundee, was recommended as a schoolmaster; and
     to go with me, was thought by pious friends in Calcutta,
     a favorable opportunity. A place in the baggage-boat was
     assigned him, together with a learned Mahommedan enquirer,
     who will thus, I conclude, get a free passage to the upper
     provinces. He is reputed wealthy, and asks nothing but a
     passage from me. The other youth finds the pinnace more
     comfortable than the baggage-boat, (i. e. the boat laden
     with scriptures and tracts, for I have no baggage) and the
     second night he coolly proposed sleeping on my couch in
     the outer cabin. This I told him would be inconvenient to
     me, but that he might sleep in my _palkee_,[165] on the
     top; and there ever since has been his domicile. He is up
     as soon as I am, and at first his want of acquaintance
     with the peculiarities of our habits was trying to me,
     but I had to deal with a christian, and must not offend
     him. By degrees we became intimate, and I begin to explain
     to him our ideas of propriety. He _is_, I have reason to
     believe, a christian; has taken my observations in good
     part, and now I find little to interrupt my comfort,
     beside what the constant presence of any except my beloved
     family would occasion. I find him especially deficient in
     scripture knowledge, and in doctrinal divinity. Hence, of
     late, every morning exercise is a lecture on some point of
     scripture. We, to-day, commence for morning-worship the
     Psalms.... About ten the Molwee comes when he can; and he
     has also found out the comfort of the Pinnace; so that he
     now comes daily. He reads the scripture in Hindoostanee,
     with me first, then he and the Baboo mutually instruct each
     other. The Baboo learns Hindoostanee from the Molwee, and
     the latter English from the former: but here I am often
     appealed to by both. I must add that the Baboo (his age is
     twenty) has begun in consequence of previous conversations,
     to read the scriptures in Bengalee to the dandies. He
     offered to instruct Ameer,[166] but he said tauntingly, ‘O
     no: I failed once, and I’ll have no more to do with it.’
     To-day we entered the troublous Ganges. A squall came on
     soon after we entered; then a lull, which left us on a
     sand-bank in the middle of the river.”

In a letter to the same, dated Aug. 7th, he writes:

     “Yesterday being very anxious respecting the objects of my
     journey, I looked into Bishop Heber’s journal; and I see
     more clearly what I have to do. His being a Bishop, his
     lively conversations, and especially his coming to confirm,
     raised an interest wherever he went, which I can have no
     pretension to expect. But at Berhampore, notwithstanding
     my inability to go amongst the people privately, all the
     station attended Divine service, and instead of ten or
     twelve as usual at the Lord’s Supper, twenty attended. For
     this encouragement I feel thankful, and trust, as health
     returns, I may at the station before me be the means
     of quickening attention to the things which belong to
     salvation. 8th. Stationary in a jungle, the weather cool,
     the night again stormy, the wind still contrary. I had an
     interesting conversation after breakfast with the Baboo,
     explaining to him the subject of the annual Atonement and
     year of Jubilee of the Israelites. We read the xvith and
     xxvth of Leviticus, and the corresponding passages in the
     Hebrews. It is gratifying to observe the pleasure these
     discourses give him, and truly,

                      Israel in ancient days
                      Not only had a view
                      Of Sinai in a blaze,
                      But saw the gospel too.

     I have these few days been studying the Levitical Institutions
     with renewed interest and benefit.

     “August 9. Yesterday evening, about ten of the dandies were
     led to sit down by us on the top of the Pinnace; and by
     keeping the Baboo to interpret what I said to them, they
     were detained for an hour, conversing on the subject of a
     mediator. By degrees they were led to see that Jesus was
     more worthy than their prophet, and they appeared very
     serious in their manner.

     “I have been engaged with the Molwee and Baboo in new
     arranging the words in the Persian Litany, which is nearly
     accomplished. In the evening, four of the dandies again
     seated themselves near to us on the poop, and by degrees
     they were led again to the subject of a mediator, who
     could pay our debt of sin, and procure for us pardon and
     acceptance with God.”

     “Reached Monghir on the 17th, in time to give notice for
     divine service the next day. Mr. W., the Commissioner,
     had returned home only the evening before. His return was
     favorable, as he opened his house as on former occasions,
     and at half past ten, all the Christians at the station
     assembled. At Boglipore, there are not above twenty
     Christian residents; at Monghir there are seventy or
     eighty, it being a favorite station for invalids to take
     up their abode. In reference to the country and climate,
     the station would be one of the most desirable on this side
     of India, the opportunities of doing good are many. On the
     opposite side of the river, is the district of Purneah,
     where many Indigo Planters are settled, and visits to that
     district at suitable seasons might be made very profitable
     to the residents. Mr. W. told me that those invalids who
     have families are gradually leaving Monghir, in order to
     settle where their children can have gratuitous, or cheap
     education. A Baptist Mission has been established here many
     years. Their Hindoostanee congregation consists of about
     sixty of all ages; only fifteen of these adults have given
     up caste for christianity; the remainder are of mixed race.
     Mr. L. who principally officiates in Hindoostanee, has
     a chapel also near the large bazaar, and, though he had
     no regard to the court-house when the chapel was built,
     the suitors in the court attend in great numbers. He has
     sometimes 400 hearers; on Sunday last about 150 were
     present. Mr. M. the other Missionary, in conjunction with
     his brother-in-law, receives pupils, both boys and girls.
     At this time they have twenty-one boys, and eleven girls.
     These are most of the particulars which will I think be
     interesting to you. On Monday morning early, a wind from
     a favourable quarter sprang up, and carried us round the
     fort, and we are proceeding not rapidly, but on the whole
     favorably. This sudden change of wind prevented me from
     writing from Monghir. I hope to send this from Patna by the
     end of the week. I have looked over the route I have to
     take, with the respective distances of stations. I shall
     send a sketch of the journey by land soon.

     “Mr. L. mentioned that he some time ago met at Boglipore,
     with one of the hill-men who understands Hindoostanee; and
     wishing to know something of the hill language, he engaged
     this man to teach him. After a time, he began to attend
     seriously to the New Testament, which they read together;
     and he seems to have experienced a decided conversion. This
     man is very anxious to impart the knowledge of Christianity
     to the hill-men, and is preparing to return as a missionary
     among them. He has been once, accompanied by a native
     Christian; and on giving his people an account of the new
     life on which he is entered, was not rejected, but invited
     to return and tell them more of this way.

     “On Thursday the 22nd August, we arrived at Patna about
     half past one P. M. As my stay would be short, I thought it
     better to remain in the boat. At that station I found much
     to gratify, and to lead to expectation of good, if proper
     means are devised. The Chaplain came to see me on arriving,
     and I dined with him in the evening; the conversation was
     on subjects connected with our work. He spoke of Wolff’s
     visit here, and the impression it had made on several; his
     own mind was much stirred up to the consideration of the
     spread of the Gospel.

     “There is no appropriate place of worship at Patna. Divine
     service once in the forenoon, in the court-house, is all
     the public duty performed, there being no place fitted for
     evening service. A gentleman who has an appointment in the
     opium department maintains a boys’ school of about thirty
     scholars near his house, in which the Gospels are read by
     the more forward boys. He entertains also a pious Christian
     youth, educated by Mr. Wilkinson, who assembles his
     servants and others for worship on Sundays. The collector’s
     lady has two boys’ schools of about thirty each, and a
     girl’s school in which about the same number are taught.
     I examined the girl’s school; and besides the junior
     classes, who are instructed in catechism, and elementary
     reading, there were five who read fluently in any part of
     the four gospels (Nagree character):--they repeated the
     ten Commandments, the Creed, and the Lord’s Prayer, and
     gave as good an account of the fall of man, the promise of
     a Saviour, the life and sufferings of the Son of God, and
     the purpose of his death, as most children in a Christian
     school might be expected to do. These instructions are
     given in a great measure by the collector’s lady herself.

     “When leaving Patna on Saturday morning the Church
     missionary teacher brought a petition signed by about
     thirty householders, Mahommedans, praying for a school.
     If an efficient teacher could be supplied by any of the
     church societies, here is a fine opening. The population
     is immense, and several of the English residents at Patna
     would willingly countenance the undertaking. I trust
     the matter will not rest till a school be established.
     I was told by more than one, that since Mr. Wolff’s
     conference with the Mahommedans here, much attention
     has been manifested by many of them to the subject of
     Christianity. Wolff’s chief disputant is very desirous
     of obtaining a work in Persian or Hindoostanee on the
     evidences of Christianity, to meet the enquiry excited
     among the natives. He frequently comes to a friend in
     the opium department, and converses on the subject. This
     gentleman obtained subscriptions, and sent to Calcutta for
     copies of the Persian Pentateuch, which have been read
     by the learned natives, and many copies in Hindoostanee
     have been taken from the catechist. He speaks of several
     respectable Mahomedans, who occasionally attended the
     Sunday morning worship conducted by the native Christian;
     and the attention he meets with generally, when he goes
     out to speak to the people and distribute tracts, is very
     encouraging. Some of the families here meet on Thursday
     evenings, at each others’ houses to read a chapter, a
     sermon, and prayer.

     “A scheme was on foot lately to commence a native college;
     but funds are not forthcoming.

     “On the 24th I came from Patna to Dinapore. On arriving
     I received a very civil note from General O’H, and soon
     after called upon him; he kindly invited me to take up my
     abode with him; but I am engaged to Mr. R. At Dinapore
     the chaplain labors almost beyond his strength. On Sunday
     morning I preached to a large congregation from the text
     Matt. xxv. 13. In the evening also the attendance was good,
     and I preached again. Next day I was very weary and staid
     at home, consulting with R. on some alterations in the
     church, and on forming a Church Missionary Association.
     On Tuesday morning I examined the regimental schools,
     consisting of forty two boys, and nearly as many girls: and
     afterwards the station school of forty one boys and girls
     of all ages and descriptions, as you may judge from there
     being five sepoys among them, one Irishman also belonging
     to the artillery. We did not get home till near ten, having
     commenced soon after six, both a good deal fagged. Mr. S.
     from Patna, and Mr. L. the Commissioner, had come up to see
     us. Wilkinson too was come from Goruckpore for change of
     air. He has had a severe illness, and the doctors say he
     must visit England in order to complete recovery. I fear
     the change recommended is quite necessary. His congregation
     amounts to 130, and he speaks of his assistant as quite
     competent to the charge of them, and worthy of confidence.
     If a new missionary should arrive, he might go there to
     learn the language; and he could attend to the one English
     service on Saturday. I trust some arrangement of the kind
     may be accomplished should Mr. Wilkinson’s departure be
     unavoidable.

     “They lately lost a little boy of seven months who seems
     to have been a very precious child: he was carried off in
     twenty-four hours: there was no doctor in the station.

     “On Wednesday at half past 6 A. M. we assembled in the
     Baptistry, and formed a Church Missionary Association.
     There were six officers present and many privates and
     others. You will see the particulars in the _Christian
     Intelligencer_. There are about 200 natives professing
     Christianity at Dinapore. At present Mr. R. employs a pious
     Drummer, an East Indian, who assembles them on Thursday
     evening; from thirty to fifty attend.

     “After breakfast on Wednesday I came away, being commended
     to God in prayer. The wind blew fair and strong and we
     reached Chuprah by night. S. and his wife are at Chuprah at
     present. I wrote him a note, not intending to go up, but he
     constrained me to promise to breakfast with them the next
     day, which I did; and the affection manifested by them was
     very gratifying to me.

     “On the 30th (August 1833,) the day was oppressively hot,
     and the night exceedingly close, so that no relief could be
     found any where. I rose weary to a degree. By 4 o’clock, it
     being full moon, I set the people off: and when they were
     gone, I had a bathe on the deck, and never experienced the
     force of the expression so sensibly, _As cold water to a
     thirsty soul_; the refreshment was indescribable. I thought
     the next morning to have had a similar enjoyment; but the
     night was cool, and the morning breeze made me shiver, and
     I was glad to escape from the water. Such are the changes
     in this climate!

     “We could not make Buxar on Saturday: but Sunday,
     Sept. 1st, we arrived at mid-day. At 4 P. M. I went to
     Hindoostanee service, the catechist read the prayers: there
     were twenty women and three men present, besides Mrs. M.
     and her child; she reads the Scriptures to the women,
     when her husband goes on Missionary journies. But few of
     the Europeans attend English service in the forenoon: and
     the numbers in the Hindoostanee congregation are filled
     up as its members are removed by death or otherwise. It
     is reported that the station is to be abolished as a
     Government post. About twenty children, male and female,
     of European invalids are taught to read and write by a
     sergeant, who officiates as clerk, for which he has twelve
     rupees a month from Government, and the children pay eight
     annas a month. Their proficiency was very moderate. The
     mission as far as I could judge, languishes at this place,
     as at Patna, for want of superintendence by an English
     Missionary. A few of the old faces were there; among them
     Mary Caroll, an interesting character. She came to my boat
     this morning, and enquired after Mem Sahib, and whether I
     had taken the pension, and were going from the country,
     as she heard. She said if Mem had been here, she should
     have got some tea; so I gave her a tea-cup full to take
     home with her. She is feeble and failing, but never misses
     service, and responded cordially to my remarks on the end
     of time, and the love of the Saviour in preparing a place
     for his people. At 6 P. M. the little chapel was full for
     English service, when I officiated to about eighty.

     “After evening service I went across the river with M. S.
     and the doctor, and enjoyed a cool refreshing night in
     his quiet bungalow. This morning early (the 2nd) I came
     over to the pinnace and had much conversation with M.
     on the affairs of the Mission, and gave such advice as
     circumstances seemed to call for. I left him such books and
     translations as I had brought and could spare, of which
     he was in great need. I saw also an interesting young
     convert, baptized three years ago at Lucknow by Mr. Bowley.
     His answers to my questions, on his views of Christian
     truth, were very satisfactory. As usual he is forsaken by
     his Mahomedan friends, a brother and mother. He teaches
     a school here of fifteen Mahomedan boys, who receives
     Christian instruction from him. M. came over at 8 A. M. and
     we went to breakfast with Colonel Bird. I feel as if my
     visit here was very opportune. May the Lord, even our God,
     grant his blessing, Amen! I know not how I have omitted
     to notice a shock of an earthquake which occurred on the
     night of the 26th August, between 11 and 12. The motion
     continued for hours, and exceedingly alarmed the whole
     country. At 20 minutes before 12 it was most violent; when
     every window shook, and many houses cracked: some of the
     native houses at Patna are thrown down, and some European
     so damaged as to require being rebuilt in part. No shock of
     so long continuance has occurred in the memory of man. All
     were roused, and most left their houses for the open air. I
     did not leave my cot; but Mr. R. came and stood by me for
     half an hour, occasionally going to comfort his wife and
     mother.

     “On the evening of September 3rd, a gale came as we reached
     Ghazepore. It blew fresh all the night, but being from the
     east we suffered nothing. Mr. T. kindly asked me up; and,
     after breakfasting with the Chaplain on the 4th, I came to
     his splendid abode. It rained hard all the 4th and 5th: in
     the night my cook and baggage-boats were swamped at the
     ghaut opposite the mausoleum. All the school-books and the
     Scriptures, which I was taking up the country, are spoilt.
     Of my own I lost nothing; but am detained over Sunday to
     get another boat. I have visited the school and shall
     preach on Sunday.

     “On the morning of the 7th, I examined the regimental
     school. There are above 100 boys and girls in one large
     room: the greater part are boys, and the girls who
     attend are of tender age. The exhibition was on a low
     scale in scripture reading and catechism and accounts.
     The commanding officer told me he was aware of the
     comparatively low attainments of the school-master
     sergeant; but he had no one of equally good conduct whom
     he could substitute, and he thought good example of great
     importance to the children. There are but few sick in
     hospital at present; the chaplain told me he visited them
     weekly, and from cot to cot. I had the whole service on the
     morning of the 8th, Mrs. R. being unwell. In the evening I
     preached also, and the attendance was very considerable,
     as I was told is very usually the case.

     “I arrived at Benares about midday on the 10th; and on
     the 11th early went to the Missionaries of the Church
     Missionary Society to inspect the endowed school in
     the city. There are 149 boys; of these fifty receive
     instruction in English. We began to examine them at six,
     and continued engaged with them till nine. I enclose a
     list[167] of the boys, exhibiting their progress; and in
     respect of the English I have much pleasure in reporting
     most favorably. The pronunciation of the youths is better
     than I have found in any other native school; and the first
     class is really proficient in the subjects enumerated
     opposite their names. A box of books for schools entrusted
     to me by Lady W. Bentinck, supplied some very useful
     rewards, and the youths seemed much gratified with them. I
     regret that from the extreme heat I was unable to attend
     equally to the other department of the school. I merely
     enquired into the nature of the instruction they are
     receiving. They all read the scriptures in the languages
     they learn, and the Hindoostanee teacher would not be
     satisfied without our waiting to hear his class repeat a
     part of the Christian catechism in use. The school is under
     the immediate charge of Mr. S., and the Rev. Mr. Smith has
     till within the last month frequently given instruction
     in the week. The Rev. Mr. Leupolt has now undertaken that
     charge.

     “On the morning of the 12th I visited the female school.
     There are eighty in usual attendance; but here I was from
     the heat obliged to confine my attention to the first
     class. This consists of eighteen, of whom thirteen were
     present. These read in two places of St. Matthew’s Gospel
     with readiness in Hindee. They read also in Genesis, and
     in a small abridgment of Scripture History. They answered
     questions on the subjects they read intelligently, and
     shewed a fair acquaintance with the leading truths of
     revelation. They repeated with accuracy the Scripture
     catechism in use, and finished with singing together a
     Christian hymn. This it seems they at first objected
     to learn; but now they are fond of this part of the
     school-exercises. Specimens of marking both in English and
     Hindee were exhibited, which shew much proficiency.

     “Mr. Smith collected the scholars of the three Hindee
     schools at the Mission premises: but from the excessive
     heat I was able to attend to only one school. In this
     about half the number, (fifteen) are reading portions of
     our Scriptures; but the schools have not long been in
     operation, and the proficiency of the boys was accordingly
     small. In consequence of the detention at Ghazepore, I
     was unable to give a Sunday both to Benares and Chunar.
     It was agreed therefore that I should preach a Missionary
     Sermon at Benares on Sunday. I went by land to Chunar and
     am happy to say I found Mr. Bowley perfectly restored to
     health, and capable of his usual labours, after having for
     several years seemed decaying. There have been no additions
     of late to the native congregation, though there have
     been several enquirers. Mr. Bowley is at present engaged
     in a correspondence with the chief Molwee at Lucknow,
     who having, as he concluded, discomfitted Mr. Wolff in
     argument, sent his statements to Mr. Bowley, challenging
     him to answer them if he could. It is remarkable that he
     heads his pamphlet (not printed) _Testimonies to Mohammed
     contained in the Christian Scriptures_;--literally, Glad
     tidings of Mohammed from the Prophets and the Gospel. The
     misapplication of his quotations is glaring; but the fact
     of our Scriptures being read, though not quite new, is thus
     confirmed.

     “On the morning of the 14th we visited the boys’ and girls’
     school; in the former are above forty, and I was glad to
     find that some fine lads, whom I saw here in 1830, have
     found provision at the neighbouring stations as writers,
     &c. The present school consists of rather small boys. In
     the girls’ school are upwards of sixty; these are much
     attended to by the lady of the Adjutant, and exhibited a
     very satisfactory proficiency in Scripture knowledge and
     the Catechism; besides being well instructed in needle
     work. Mr. E. catechises both boys and girls on Sunday
     mornings in Church before divine service, when some of
     their friends are also present.

     “The Church Missionary Association is in beneficial
     operation; they raise funds for the support of (I think)
     three readers of the Scriptures, and two native schools.
     On the whole my mind is much set at rest on some points,
     respecting the Mission at Chunar by this visit. The Lord
     grant his blessing!

     “On Sunday, the 15th September I preached for the Church
     Mission at Benares, and 156 Rs. were collected after the
     sermon. This, considering that the Chaplain raises about
     130 Rs. monthly for the support of the native female
     school, was beyond expectation. To faithful labours and
     consistent character much of the success of the plans for
     assisting the Mission, both here and at Chunar, is to be
     attributed. The state of English society, both at Ghazepore
     and Benares, is very favourable to Christian projects. May
     God raise up, as in due time He no doubt will, suitable
     instruments for extending the knowledge of His saving name!
     On Tuesday morning I passed an hour at sunrise with the
     Missionary brethren in reading and prayer, and came away to
     Juanpore in the evening.

     “At this place is a pretty little Church in the Gothic
     style. There are three principal residents, by whom
     chiefly the funds have been raised. Lady William it seems
     kindly said to Mr. B. at Allahabad, when told of this
     undertaking, that she would pay for glazing the windows;
     this has been done and 120 Rs. are owing, besides which
     220 Rs. were due for partial pewing. On Sunday, September
     22nd, I officiated in this pretty building. The advantage
     of having an appropriate place for divine service was
     never more manifest than here. In the morning the whole
     Christian community assembled, in number thirty-five; of
     these fourteen remained to partake of the Lord’s Supper.
     In the evening there were twenty present, and about this
     number usually assembled on Sundays twice a day, when the
     judge, collector, and commanding officer officiate in turn,
     reading the service of the Church, and a printed sermon.
     These three families meet also for social worship at each
     other’s houses on Thursday evenings. There is a Catechist
     of the Church Missionary Society at Jaunpore. His name
     is Mirza Yusuf Bukir, a son of the celebrated traveller,
     Abu Talib Khan. This man resided at Allahabad when Mr. W.
     Bird was there, and obtained from him a New Testament in
     Persian, and occasionally asked of Mr. Bird explanations
     of passages. This led to his conversion. He now instructs
     the Christians connected with the native regiment at
     Jaunpore, and reads the scriptures to the servants of two
     families. Mr. Brown derives assistance from him also in
     translating tracts for circulation, when his public duties
     allow him any leisure, which is seldom. I had the pleasure
     to baptize Mirza’s wife on the 24th, after several years
     of refusal to receive the Christian religion. This shews
     his perseverance; and all the friends at the station bear
     testimony to his consistent piety; though it is thought
     he has not sufficient employment where he is, and I wrote
     to Dr. C. at Patna on the subject of his being employed
     there, to which Mirza perfectly agrees. A youth taught in
     the Church Missionary school at Benares will, I expect,
     be entertained in the native college at Jaunpore as a
     teacher of English. It was at one time in contemplation to
     have placed him in a school in connexion with the Church
     Missionary Society; but there not being sufficient funds at
     disposal, it was determined to have English taught in the
     native institution, for here, as every where, the people
     are desirous of education in English.

     “My bodily strength is considerably renewed; but the
     confinement of the boat, equally with _dawk_ travelling,
     has prevented my deriving all the benefit I trust I may now
     hope for, at least on reaching Cawnpore. I am preparing a
     different route to that which we talked of together. By the
     one then proposed I could, if health held out, by scarcely
     intermitting a day of travelling or visiting schools, reach
     Bombay by the middle of March, and then, if a ship be ready
     to sail, reach Calcutta by the end of April or early in
     May. But unless duty called, Bombay would be out of my way;
     and I cannot but own that the spirit of enterprise has much
     departed from me. I shall now propose to go from Cawnpore
     to Saugor (not included in the former plan) expecting
     to be there the second Sunday in November; at Mhow the
     first Sunday in December; Neemuch the third in December;
     Nuseerabad at Christmas; Agra the first or second Sunday in
     January; then Muttra, Delhi, Meerut, Kurnaul, and to the
     snowy mountains during April, May and till the middle of
     June; return by Meerut, Fettyguhr, and the Ganges, so as
     to reach Calcutta in July, or early in August. This would
     not make my absence from Calcutta above three months longer
     than in the former scheme, and would keep me upon my own
     ground; and in the hills I should have useful employment.
     But in the view of such a journey I cannot but feel how
     appropriate the language of the Apostle is, If the Lord
     will? I do trust my resolves are all formed in that spirit,
     and I often do feel that a reconciled God is near at hand.
     If the Bishop could but make this tour I should expect God
     would greatly bless his visits. I find every where some who
     seem waiting for the kingdom of God, and a few who love and
     live on the Gospel of our Saviour. A marvellous change in
     public feeling has certainly taken place among the upper
     classes of our countrymen, in respect of the disposition
     to favour good plans. It seems a pity that their means
     of supporting such plans should be shortened just now. I
     was expecting the society of a valued young friend from
     Cawnpore to Mhow, when behold! the youth has found for
     himself a wife; and the lady cannot travel such long stages
     as I must make. I must therefore proceed alone, with my own
     thoughts to keep me company. I leave this, D.V. on Monday
     evening by land, having left my pinnace here: I intend to
     stay over the heat of Tuesday at a staging bungalow; go
     forty miles to Futtypore, where are Christian friends; stay
     with them till Thursday evening, and proceed to Cawnpore so
     as to arrive by Friday to breakfast.

     “On the 25th September, I arrived at Allahabad, and on the
     26th went to breakfast with the Chaplain; and afterwards
     with him visited and examined the school in the fort.
     There are twenty boys and eight or ten girls receiving
     instruction: of these eight or ten are orphans, and their
     schooling is paid for out of the sacramental and other
     collections: and also paper, pens, and books are supplied
     to the school. The other children pay three and half
     Rs. each a month, as remuneration to the teachers. The
     proficiency of the children was very moderate, except in
     the Church Catechism, in which about twelve of them gave
     ready and intelligent answers to questions. There, as at
     other stations, the reward-books supplied to me by Lady
     William were gladly received. On the 28th, I was unwell,
     and obliged to lie by. On the 29th, towards evening I
     examined the native girls’ school, where several ladies of
     the station met me. By the care of friends here a large
     compound close upon the bazaar has been obtained, and a
     very commodious school-room erected from funds raised on
     the spot. This was the first time the school was used,
     nineteen girls were present, all children of Mahomedans! It
     is expected that the number of children will not increase.
     Of those present ten read with fluency any part of the
     Hindoostanee New Testament, and repeated correctly the
     Hindoostanee catechism in use. The school is under the
     care of an officer’s widow, assisted by a poor woman, who
     teaches the lower classes.

     “A catechist of the Church Missionary Society is also
     stationed here, named David Batavia, originally from
     Ceylon. He reads prayers with the Native Christians in the
     invalid lines, amounting to from ten to fifteen; and also
     to about the same number of christians of the same class
     in the fort. He goes about from time to time distributing
     tracts, and conversing with the natives about Christianity.
     His piety and benevolence are admitted by all who know
     him, but no extensive good has yet appeared to result from
     his labours. He resides in a house which was given to the
     Church Missionary Society, by the Rev. Mr. Crauford, when
     he was Chaplain here. The house is well situated for a
     Missionary’s residence. On Sunday morning we had Divine
     Service in the garrison at six. There is now only one
     Company of Artillery here, and of these many are Roman
     Catholics; so that only about forty were present: but the
     conductors and others connected with the magazine, who
     with their families reside in the fort, exceed sixty; and
     with a few from cantonments made a congregation of about
     100. I preached in the morning, and in the evening at the
     circuit bungalow, where upwards of thirty attended. The
     partition-wall in this bungalow is about to be removed,
     when it will be much more commodious for public worship
     than in its present state, and it is expected more will
     attend. On Sunday evening last--those who came late could
     with difficulty be seated. The situation of the ground
     about the fort is below the level of the Ganges during the
     rains. The river is kept out by an embankment, which was
     this year in danger of giving way. The ground is thus low
     for a distance of about two miles from the fort, where on
     a rising ground the Military Cantonments and Civilians’
     houses are situated. No Church could therefore be erected
     nearer than about two miles from the fort. A vacant space
     may there be found close to the circuit bungalow, the
     nearest point to the fort. So that there must always be two
     congregations at this station. Mr. R. Bird has informed you
     of the numbers and growing importance of Allahabad; as a
     Missionary station it is become of very great importance.
     A numerous and wealthy population reside in the bazars,
     engaged extensively in trade; and the town being at the
     junction of the rivers Ganges and Jumna, will increase in
     proportion as the country is prosperous. The numbers who
     now resort to the Board of Revenue and to the Sudder Court
     will give opportunity of circulating the glad tidings over
     all upper India; and Mr. L’s experience at Monghir has led
     me to build much on this resort of strangers.

     “Futtypore, October 3rd. At this station there are only
     four government servants; and only one of them married.
     The judge and doctor are old acquaintances of mine, and I
     am staying a day to break the journey to Cawnpore, where I
     hope to arrive to-morrow morning. A school is maintained
     by these few residents here, the medical man giving a good
     deal of his time to it, and also to a hospital where many
     sick poor are attended to: the expense of this is also
     maintained by friends on the spot. The population being
     to a considerable extent Mohamedan, the school is not so
     well attended as is desirable. I visited it this morning:
     there were thirty boys present; of these six have made some
     proficiency in English under a native, educated in the
     school at Cawnpore. His proficiency is very moderate, and
     his scholars accordingly come on slowly. They were reading
     the 3rd chapter of St. Matthew, having with much patience
     and good management been brought to read our Scriptures. At
     first much opposition was made to their introduction. They
     are aware, they say, that from reading these books people
     become Christians. Here as every where the field is open
     for Missionary labour.

     “I have here met with an officer who has travelled the
     route I mentioned a few days since by Saugor to Mhow,
     Neemuch, Nuseerabad, and Agra. I was apprehensive that
     there might be dense jungle to pass through, and danger
     from malaria; but he tells me the country is pretty well
     cultivated, and that there is no jungle to speak of; that
     the aspect of the country, moreover, is interesting, much
     beyond these level plains. I seem therefore fixed in that
     plan. I shall be ready to leave Cawnpore, I conclude, by
     the last week in October; and will send before I proceed, a
     detailed account of the progress I expect to make.

     “I leave here the young Baboo who accompanied me, and whose
     conduct has been uniformly Christian and correct.

     “I arrived at Cawnpore on the morning of the 4th October.
     From the wish not to lose time, I had left my boat at
     Allahabad and proceeded _dawk_, as I had to that place from
     Benares, via Jaunpore.

     “This mode of travelling made me very unwell, and prevented
     for a whole week my taking so active a part as I otherwise
     might have done. I was also prevented visiting Lucknow,
     which I could have done only by _dawk_. I wrote however
     to Mr. Greenwood for information. He also came over for a
     day to Cawnpore, and represented his situation at Lucknow
     as pleasant and his prospects as encouraging. He receives
     every attention and aid which Christian kindness can
     devise, from the chief authorities there.

     “October 6. I attended Divine service at the church
     bungalow, and stood up once more in Martyn’s pulpit. The
     place is a little enlarged, by adding the portion where
     the communion-table stood, to the body of the building,
     and adding another space to which the communion-table has
     been removed: and also a small vestry. I was rather late
     from the distance of Mr. W’s. bungalow, and this prevented
     my mind, in going, from dwelling on the well-known scene,
     and by-gone experience. The congregation was full and
     attentive, and my mind a good deal solemnized by the
     service. So that on returning, the remembrance of Martyn,
     and the Sherwoods and Mary, with the occupations of that
     period, came powerfully to my recollection, and I could not
     prevent the tears from flowing rather plentifully. They
     were not, however, tears of regret altogether, for joys
     departed. A sense of much short-coming in duty mixed in my
     feelings; and the forgiving love of God, with the prospect
     of all joining in thankful adoration in the realms of
     bliss, greatly preponderated. I almost involuntarily began
     to sing:--

            “Thy mercy, my God, is the theme of my song.”

     “The two Chaplains at Cawnpore perform their public service
     on Sundays at the riding-school of the Lancers, where the
     horse and foot Artillery also attend, and at the church
     bungalow, where H. M. Infantry regiment attends, and the
     civil servants and other inhabitants of the station. This
     duty the Chaplains take alternately. Evening service is
     always held in the church bungalow at half an hour after
     sun set; and this duty the Chaplains divide between them.
     Besides this there is an evening service on Tuesdays
     at the Magazine, for the families connected with that
     department; on Wednesday evening in the small chapel on Mr.
     W’s premises, where many of the riding-school congregation
     attend, and on Thursday evening in a large room near the
     Infantry barracks. On Sunday evening also there is evening
     service in the chapel of Mr. W’s premises.

     “The attendance on these occasions is generally full,
     especially at the church bungalow on Sunday evenings, when
     a very considerable number of the upper classes, as well
     as others, are regularly present. I officiated at all
     these places, except the riding-school: being prevented
     by illness from going out the Sunday I was at liberty for
     that service. On Sunday, the 20th, I preached in the church
     bungalow in behalf of the mission here, when 695 Rs. were
     collected and 100 Rs. sent afterwards, besides some blank
     tickets, which would make the collection upwards of 1000
     Rs.

     “There is an establishment at Cawnpore called the Free
     School, established and partly maintained by private
     contributions; and to which Government allows 400 Rs. a
     month. In this there are at present seventy-two children
     learning English, of whom eighteen are christians who
     are boarded and clothed also from the funds. There is a
     Persian class, and also a Sanscrit class. Those who learn
     English all learn together according to their proficiency.
     Several native youths have become qualified in this school
     for public offices, and have obtained situations of
     considerable emolument.

     “Connected with the mission are four schools, superintended
     by different friends, who take an interest in them. These
     have each an English class, as well as scholars who learn
     Hindoostanee or Persian. About 250 of these boys assembled
     in the church bungalow on the morning of the 12th. I was
     obliged to confine the examination to the English classes,
     which occupied us from sunrise till after nine. The first
     class of the Free School boys had made the greatest
     progress, and their pronunciation of English was very
     correct; but the best boys had been provided for in various
     ways lately, so that those present had not advanced far. A
     few of them had some knowledge of grammar, and could point
     out with readiness the position of countries and remarkable
     places on the globe. The boys of the magazine school were
     next in proficiency, and a class in Hindoostanee read
     with admirable accuracy and readiness portions in the
     Hindoostanee New Testament, which they at the same time
     translated. The Rev. Mr. C. officiates in Hindoostanee at
     the church bungalow, at 4 P. M. on Sundays and Thursdays. I
     attended on one occasion; there were six men and six women,
     which constitute the chief of his regular congregation. A
     catechist, brought up by Mr. Bowley, has been stationed
     here about three years. He goes into the bazaar almost
     daily to converse with his countrymen on the important
     subject of religion. He is spoken of as maintaining a
     steady christian character. He officiates as clerk to Mr.
     C. and reads the chapter, which Mr. C. expounds after
     prayers.

     “I examined the school of H. M. 44th, which is in the
     best condition by far of any school I have seen during
     this journey: the general reading and knowledge of the
     English language, the acquaintance with English history,
     and accuracy in dates, the proficiency in geography and
     arithmetic of the first class of the boys, consisting of
     seven, was exceedingly pleasing. Three of them also read
     Hindoostanee. The first class of girls also were very
     well instructed, and these classes, as well as the lower
     ones, were all well acquainted with the Church Catechism.
     There were 100 of both sexes. The school of the Lancers
     consists of about seventy; their proficiency was not so
     good, having been interrupted by sickness. The mortality of
     this station has been great this year, beyond most other
     seasons. The heat both for intenseness and continuance
     has this year been unusual. The register between July and
     September exhibits a list of 224 buried. The children of
     the regiments have been carried off to a great amount. On
     account of this sickness the duty of visiting the hospital
     came heavily upon the chaplains, especially on Mr. W., as
     these visits were mostly made during the day, when his
     colleague was unable to go out in the heat. A considerable
     seriousness has been wrought in the minds of the generality
     at the station by the mortality around, in connection with
     the labors of the chaplains. The attendance at the Lord’s
     Table, one of the Sundays I was there, amounted to 115, of
     whom ten were native Christians; and it was said not to be
     a large communion.

     “The collections on these occasions are liberal, beyond
     what is found at most other stations. The subject of
     missions for several years past has been brought frequently
     to the notice of the congregation, and a box with two
     openings is carried round to collect the offerings at
     the communion;--one marked _Missionary_, the other
     _Charitable_. The collection is usually about 200 Rs.
     and stated congregational collections are also made. A
     charitable committee has been formed some time; also a
     Missionary committee. The charitable committee relieves
     weekly between 400 and 500 poor: the Missionary committee
     have in hand now about 10,000 Rs.

     “It is not decided what kind of Missionary Institution
     shall be established, or in what manner it is proposed to
     conduct it. The want of schoolmasters qualified to teach
     English is, however, becoming manifest, and any plan which
     would supply this want would be deserving of warm support.
     It is not in the first instance a Missionary, so much as
     a schoolmaster, that is called for in a variety of places
     at this time: men who would teach grammatically on a small
     allowance. The free-school at Cawnpore might serve as the
     lower branch of such an establishment. At present, as soon
     as qualified to earn from 20 Rs. a month and upwards, the
     scholars leave school. A plan must therefore be adopted
     to retain promising youths till they become sufficiently
     instructed to instruct others.

     “I was requested by the Chaplain to state particularly the
     condition of the station libraries. During his Government,
     Lord Hastings induced the Court of Directors to send
     out a library to each station of European troops. These
     were mostly supplied according to a list Lord Hastings
     himself sent home, and are generally speaking of a useful
     tendency. No additions have, however, been made to the list
     first supplied, and some additional supplies are greatly
     needed. In the Infantry regiment the commanding officer
     has encouraged the resort of the soldiers to the reading
     room, and a considerable spirit of reading and improvement
     prevails in H. M. 44th. The soldiers, assisted by the
     officers, have added, I believe, to the Government stock;
     and many of the soldiers’ wives have benefitted also by
     the Library:--a circumstance too unusual hitherto in the
     army. The appointment of Librarian, and also the care of
     the books, was originally assigned by Government to the
     Chaplains of stations, but this order has not been properly
     attended to.

     “In the Cavalry Corps at Cawnpore, the public library has
     not been encouraged, and on Government determining to
     erect a new reading-room, the Chaplains were not consulted
     as to the site or dimensions. The situation of the new
     reading-room is not considered favorable for the resort
     of the soldiers, and no less than 6000 Rs. have been
     expended, when a room of half the cost would have equally
     answered the purpose. If Government were to republish
     the order placing the station libraries under the charge
     of the Chaplains, and to order that in all arrangements
     respecting the libraries and schools and the rooms for
     them, the Chaplain should be of the Committee, it would
     conduce greatly to the efficiency of these institutions;
     and if either from public or private sources a few suitable
     books were from time to time added to the existing stock,
     it would tend greatly to keep up a spirit of reading among
     the soldiers.”

From Cawnpore, the Archdeacon proceeded to Banda. He arrived at
that place on the evening of Saturday, Oct. 26, and on the Monday
following received letters from the Bishop of Calcutta, informing him
that it was the intention of the authorities in England, to appoint
him to the Bishopric of Bombay, which an act passed this year for the
renewal of the East India Company’s Charter, had enabled his majesty,
King William IV., to erect. The directions of the Bishop also were,
that the Archdeacon should forthwith return to the presidency,
preparatory to his proceeding to England. The intelligence which
the Bishop of Calcutta conveyed, was altogether unexpected by the
Archdeacon, and occasioned him some embarrassment. The calls upon
his pecuniary resources had of late been many, what with the charges
attendant on the education of his children, and his wife’s voyages
to England, added to some loss by the failure of a house of agency.
Unless, therefore, government should provide for the expenses, which
a voyage to England, for consecration, would entail upon him, he
could scarcely avoid contracting some debt for the time; and that
he felt would scarcely be right for him to risk, at his period of
life. These, and other considerations which were likely to affect
the future welfare of his family, the Archdeacon candidly stated to
the Bishop of Calcutta in a letter from Banda, in which he further
observes:--

     “I turn my face toward Calcutta to-morrow, D.V. I had
     reached just the border of my former local knowledge, and
     should have been very unwilling to give up the prospect
     before me had I proceeded much further. I had taken no
     measures directly or indirectly towards the attainment of
     the honor and responsibility in question; and trust I may
     hope that God will guide and second my poor endeavours to
     serve the Church according to His will. If then I say I
     turn toward Calcutta with some reluctance, it is merely
     lest what I have stated should prevent my going to England.
     If prevented going, the omission of visiting the remaining
     stations would be in vain, and the loss sustained for no
     good purpose. For, little as I feel capable of effecting,
     yet good will I am persuaded follow these passing visits.

     “Our Church goes on her way, doing what she can; too
     secure, perhaps, that her endeavors are generally known
     and appreciated. Those who separate from us tell all
     they do, and seem sometimes to make much of little. To
     those at a distance they however seem the only people at
     work, and in consequence are applied to for books and for
     information on missionary subjects, and for missionaries
     and school-masters. Mr. D. for instance, has been applied
     to, to supply a teacher at Allahabad; and at Banda he was
     applied to in the first instance to supply a teacher at
     Futtypore. In visiting the stations, I see almost every one
     who is disposed to take an interest in missions, schools,
     &c. They have almost all been educated in Church-of-England
     principles and modes of worship, and would all prefer
     receiving aid from us, and remaining connected with the
     Establishment. These visits bring them acquainted with what
     is doing among their own friends. They will learn where to
     look for help, such as they can in all respects approve. In
     this way some, who were inclined to good, are led to come
     forward openly, and the cause of truth and righteousness
     gathers strength. The disposition to establish schools is
     increasing everywhere; and if half a dozen teachers could
     be got at once, they might be set to work. With reference
     to this subject the High School might become an important
     Institution, and would be well employed in educating some
     of the best boys with the expectation of being useful as
     school-masters.

     “I must travel to Allahabad by land, which will occupy
     about ten days; and then I shall hire a boat to proceed
     downwards. A letter is ten days reaching Calcutta from
     this; so that a few lines, if you see cause for changing my
     course, would meet me at Benares. I could even then return
     to Saugor by a more direct route, and pursue the plan
     before intended with the loss of not more than a month. I
     have made observations in my progress with reference to
     future visitations, which I intend to commit to writing
     with a view to aid in enabling to do more good.”

To the same prelate he writes:--

     “Nov. 12th, 1823, near Gazeepore. On arriving at Benares
     yesterday morning, I found your favor of the 5th inst.

     “At Benares I was not less than 200 miles from the point
     whence I returned; I should therefore, had I delayed at
     Benares, have been able to march straight to the hills,
     without time to accomplish any thing at intermediate
     stations. I think therefore you will approve of my coming
     on at once to Calcutta, as I am now doing. I could not have
     borne so long a journey by _dawk_. I passed Sunday last at
     Chunar, and took part of the duty with Mr. E.; Mr. Smith
     officiated twice at Benares.

     “I am happy to state that Messrs. Knorpp and Leupolt are
     such proficients in Hindoostanee, as already to be able to
     undertake the duties of the native Christian Chapel.”


      [162] The Native Christian master of the Mirzapore school,
            and the person who had formerly been ejected from
            house and home for editing the Enquirer.

      [163] See above pp. 54, 55.

      [164] See _Martyn’s Letters and Journals_. October 23rd,
            1806, for one or two notices which will illustrate
            what is here said.

      [165] Palanquin.

      [166] One of the attendants.

      [167] From this list it appears, that the first class (of
            9 boys) could read, spell, and translate Goldsmith’s
            History of England to p. 77, and Scripture Lessons,
            on the History of Joseph to p. 14. They committed
            to memory the 117th No. on Agriculture, and 248th
            No. on Astronomy, of Blair’s Preceptor. They
            worked exercises on the 14th Rule of Syntax of
            Lennie’s Grammar; the Rule of Three; 13th Problem
            on the terrestrial globe of Goldsmith’s Grammar of
            Geography, and were committing to memory the 2nd
            part of Watts’ Catechism a second time.




                             CHAPTER XX.

     DELAY IN HIS NOMINATION TO THE BISHOPRIC--NARROW ESCAPE
       FROM DEATH--SUMMONED TO ENGLAND--VISITS THE CAPE AND ST.
       HELENA--HIS CONSECRATION--INTERVIEW WITH THE KING--ARRIVAL
       IN MADRAS--VISIT TO TANJORE AND TINNEVELLY.


The Archdeacon arrived in Calcutta, from his visitation, on the 30th
of November 1833. He there learned, it seems, that his probable
destination had been changed; for in writing to Mr. Sherer, he
observes--

     “You are aware of the intention of those in power,
     respecting my being appointed to Madras. I have not sought,
     and may therefore, I trust, receive the appointment as from
     God, and expect Him to guide and uphold me in the duties
     of it. To have gone home without so public a designation,
     would, in some sense, have been more agreeable to me;
     expecting, as I must, to be often called before the public:
     but to have taken ‘sweet counsel’ once more with you and my
     family would have been a great gratification. Should the
     appointment take place here, it will be like taking a final
     adieu of you all, as it respects the life that now is.”

It appears, however, that for several months he received no further
communications on the subject of the Bishopric. Thus he writes

                             TO HIS WIFE.

                                                   “Feb. 6, 1834.

     “I have received several letters from various quarters on
     my rumoured preferment. In the mean time, I hear no more
     on the subject. I am not, however, in the least anxious. I
     am _sure_ whatever be God’s will must be best. I have no
     reluctance to remain here.”

The Archdeacon was now, in fact, on board a pilot-schooner, cruising
in the bay of Bengal, with a view to recover himself from the effects
of a bad cold. From thence he writes


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

     “The renewal of the East India Company’s Charter promises
     great and important changes for this country. They are all
     intended by the framers of the Bill; without any regard
     to religion in any form. How far God will overrule this
     proceeding in rulers professedly Christian, remains to be
     seen. Certain it is that great changes have already taken
     place, in both European and Native Society. In the latter,
     any real good has been effected through God’s blessing on
     missionary exertions. To this, Government in former days
     was opposed; now it is not so: and we require only men and
     support, to spread the christian knowledge far and wide;
     and we do hope Divine Providence is favouring the purpose,
     and will supply the means. As to our European Society, a
     friend who was with us lately from Madras, says, that in
     all the Society, chiefly mercantile, he came in contact
     with whilst with me, he saw or heard nothing in general
     offensive to christian feeling. This from a stranger, and
     one capable of judging, speaks well for Calcutta. Indeed,
     at this time, every pulpit in Calcutta, and the adjoining
     stations, is supplied with a faithful preacher; and the
     example of our beloved Bishop makes even the timid bold ‘to
     declare the whole counsel of God.’”


                            TO HIS SISTER.

                                                  “March 4, 1834.

     “Before this reaches you, my destination will be fixed.
     If not removed from this presidency, it is probable my
     residence henceforth will be at Agra, the seat of the new
     residency, as next in authority to the Bishop, who will
     continue at Calcutta. In either case, the prospect of you
     and I meeting again, is removed to a distance I do not
     like to let my mind dwell upon. When I recur to Stoke,
     a thousand overpowering recollections crowd upon me....
     For myself, my days have passed as a dream. I have had
     much enjoyment, but seem not to have accomplished any one
     thing as I might have done. I was beginning to anticipate
     much enjoyment in the society of Sherer and my brothers,
     but that seems to be deferred for a season, if it ever
     arrive. The anxieties attendant on domestic life have been
     comparatively few. The loss of children I now contemplate
     as a gracious appointment, fixing by a process at the time
     painful, two olive-branches in the Paradise of God; and
     if it please God, that Eliza and the children reach me in
     safety, no earthly care will more, I think disturb me. Yet
     I know cares will arrive, but as my day is, strength will
     be vouchsafed.”

In the month following the date of the foregoing letter, Archdeacon
Corrie had a narrow escape from death by drowning. The circumstances
attending the danger to which he was exposed, are thus related by
himself in a letter


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

                                          “Calcutta, May 6, 1834.

     “I may mention that on the 22nd ult. J. Jackson and I set
     off to go to Ishipore, or the Government powder-mills.
     Through the kindness of a friend in the Military Board, the
     use of a house there had been assigned me, for two months,
     near to our valued friend Major Powney; and we were going
     to take possession. We proceeded in a _bholiah_,[168] with
     a fair wind, and had reached opposite the grove, when an
     alarm was given that the _Bore_[169] was coming in. John
     and I had just time to get from under the cover, when, sure
     enough, a foaming breaker was close astern. The first wave
     the boat surmounted, but then ‘broaching to,’ as sailors
     say, the second wave turned her bottom upwards. John and
     I and all the people, ten in number, were plunged into
     the deep. I for some time could not rise, and swallowed a
     good deal of water, when I providentially became involved
     in the sail, by the aid of which I reached the surface;
     and my servant (Wahid) who was swimming in search of me,
     presently seized my arm and drew me towards the boat, which
     was floating up with the tide; and by degrees I got upon
     her keel. John had some difficulty also, in reaching the
     boat; and we were picked up by a friendly Indigo-planter,
     who himself narrowly escaped. He gave me a blanket, which
     prevented cold, and at Tittagur, we got from Mr. Bateman,
     at the Bishop’s country-house, a change of clothes, and
     in the evening we returned by land without suffering any
     inconvenience whatever. The news somehow got abroad, and I
     have received much sympathy, and more tokens of interest in
     my fate than I expected. The danger was imminent, but was
     over in a few minutes.”

In a memorandum penned on the day following that on which this
accident occurred, after reciting the foregoing particulars
respecting it, the Archdeacon adds:--

     “On finding myself below the flood the thought occurred,
     ‘Is my end come?’ But I do not recollect that any
     ejaculation or any cry for help escaped me. Afterward in
     Mr. P’s boat there appeared danger from the roughness of
     the weather, when I did refer myself to God, to be disposed
     of according to His will, without reservation. I have this
     morning before day, solemnly called my ways to remembrance
     before God, and have solemnly ‘received the Atonement,’
     if I never received it before; desiring to receive Christ
     as my sanctification, as well as my righteousness; having
     proof even since this event, that unless He sanctify as
     well as justify me, I shall remain unholy still.”

During the month of July, Mrs. Corrie and her daughters reached
Calcutta in safety, and in the meanwhile the Archdeacon had received
directions to proceed to England for consecration. He observed in a
letter addressed, on the 24th of June


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

     “A few days, since, I received from Mr. Grant an official
     notice of my nomination as Bishop of Bombay, and
     desiring me to come home for consecration at my earliest
     convenience. I have received a verbal consent from the
     chiefs in authority here also, to send me home on service
     with the same allowance I now have, till I enter on my new
     appointment.... I will say nothing of the prospect before
     me, but that I feel rather depressed than elevated by it.
     Bombay is as new to me as it would be to you, except that I
     know what it is to bear this climate and people.”

It was found, however, that the Indian authorities had no power to
allow the Archdeacon to receive his present stipend until he should
enter on his new appointment. The reason indeed why the Government
at home could give no definite instructions until now, respecting
the Archdeacon’s movements was, that although the provisions of the
new charter allowed of his appointment to one of the additional
bishoprics, it decided also that his stipend as Archdeacon should
thereupon cease, and that his allowance as Bishop should not commence
until he actually landed in India, to exercise the duties of his
office there. But as under such circumstances he felt called upon
to decline the office, it was in contemplation to send out a bishop
from England who, in conjunction with the bishop of Calcutta, should
consecrate the third bishop in India. The difficulty alluded to
having however been surmounted, the Archdeacon writes


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

                                                 “August 4, 1834.

     “I am happy in the prospect of enjoying your society for
     a season again. I think we shall correspond with more
     intimate, though I scarcely conceive we can with warmer,
     feeling than before. My heart has always clung to the idea
     of brothers and sister as, next to wife and children, the
     strongest tie to earth: and my visit home will, I am sure,
     only strengthen this feeling. I wrote to H. in May, of
     my expectation of coming home in September. Some rumours
     had led me lately to conclude that I might be spared the
     journey and voyage; but last week I received a notification
     from the Commissioners for Indian affairs, that His Majesty
     has granted me a pension of £800 a year, to be drawn only
     when deriving no emolument from ecclesiastical preferment
     in India. This we conclude Mr. Grant meant as a supply for
     the expences of visiting England for consecration. It is
     all he can do; and the Court of Directors are altogether so
     opposed to the increase of [the number of] Bishops, that
     they will afford no aid whatever.... I expect to embark in
     October. It was in October last that I was first informed
     of the preferment intended for me, but till June last, had
     no certainty: and now the difficulties by sea and land, and
     especially the separation from family, render the prospect
     far from cheering. I do not pretend to be insensible to
     the distinction implied in being a bishop, though heartily
     glad that no ‘Lordship’ is connected with it in this
     instance.[170] I know Indian society well; and know that
     from the familiarity with which all in the service mix,
     from the Ensign or Writer of six months standing, to the
     General or grave Judge of the Circuit, that a man coming
     with a title is viewed with much jealousy: and unless, like
     Heber, he make himself one with them, whilst every sentence
     he utters proves his mental superiority, he will rather be
     shunned than sought. As it is, whilst I seek not theirs’
     but them, I may, as in time past, be permitted to do a
     little good in my way.”

Archdeacon Corrie had made every preparation for proceeding to
England, intending that Mrs. C. and his daughters should remain
in India; but the health of his wife began so decidedly to fail
again, that the medical men peremptorily decided that her only human
chance of recovery was from a voyage to the Cape. This unforeseen
domestic trial prevented the Archdeacon from embarking so soon as
was originally arranged; but on the 12th of November he quitted the
shores of Bengal in the ship “Exmouth.” It pleased God to grant him
a prosperous voyage to the Cape, where he arrived with his family
on the 13th of January 1835. After a stay there of some days, the
Archdeacon embarked for England, taking with him his eldest daughter,
the rest of his family remaining at the Cape. In a memorandum dated
Feb. 13th. he remarks:--

     “We left St. Helena yesterday evening about 7 o’clock, and
     have thus far had a fair and favouring wind. On the 11th
     I went with Anna to visit Napoleon’s grave. The spot is
     sequestered, and might well attract his notice in life.
     He used frequently to retire, and read under the trees
     which now overshadow his tomb. Great was the kindness
     of the English Government towards him; but his restless
     mind could take pleasure only in troubled scenes. He was
     a great instrument in breaking down old barriers to the
     progress of Divine truth. May God in mercy supply the means
     of establishing His truth, on the Continent of Europe
     and in all the earth! I received much civility from the
     Governor, His Majesty’s Commissioners and others. Only
     one Chaplain in the island, and he sickly. The population
     is about 5,000. There is a good deal doing in the way of
     schools. A Free-school contains one hundred and twenty
     boys; Plantation day-school fifty-five boys, and twenty-two
     girls. Four evening schools ninety-two: four girls’
     Day-schools, fifty-seven: Hutsgate, twenty-six. In all, 512
     children, of whom sixty-nine are supported by Government,
     and sixty-eight boys, and twenty-five girls by the
     Benevolent Society. There are about 300 Chinese settlers;
     industrious, but ignorant. For these a school-master is to
     be recommended by His Majesty’s Commissioners. Mr. Brook,
     however, told me, that they have families by the race of
     mixed blood, and that their children go to school and
     become identified with their mother’s class. The labours
     of the Chaplain are too much for his health: another is
     greatly needed.”

On Tuesday April 7, the Archdeacon and his daughter landed at Dover
from the ‘Exmouth,’ slept at Canterbury, and proceeded the next day
to London, where he was cordially welcomed by Mrs. Wilberforce Bird,
the daughter of his valued friend, the late Rev. David Brown. He
remarks in a memorandum, dated April 12th.--

     “I have been prospered hitherto in all my expectations.
     I have endeavoured to pray for pardon and grace to guide
     me--all that I have aimed at hitherto, has succeeded.
     May I be enabled to receive the good, so as not to be
     elated and so grieve the Holy Spirit to leave me to
     darkness and corruption.... The views on the way to town
     were enlivening on all sides. Multitudes of small, most
     comfortable dwellings, well deserving the name of ‘The
     happy homes of England;’ besides the stately houses
     scattered up and down: whilst increasing buildings at every
     place, indicate high prosperity, and give an appearance of
     comfort that goes to the heart. But comfort is inseparable
     from duty, and my duty seems to call me away from these
     fair scenes to a literally and spiritually, ‘dry and barren
     land.’ May God but go with me, for he can open springs in
     the desert.”

In obedience, therefore, to the calls of duty, the Archdeacon did not
consider himself at liberty to remain in England longer than might
be absolutely necessary for accomplishing the object of his voyage.
Within a few days, therefore, of his arrival in London, he waited
upon the Archbishop of Canterbury, to receive his Grace’s directions
respecting such matters as might be preliminary to consecration.
The Melbourne administration having, however, just at that time
returned to power, the unsettled state of things consequent upon a
change of Ministry, occasioned some delay in the preparation of the
official documents connected with the defining of the boundaries &c.
of the diocese of Madras, to which see the Archdeacon had ultimately
been nominated. In the meanwhile, the Archdeacon took occasion
to communicate with the Committees of the religious Societies in
connection with the Church; and had the happiness to receive from
all, the assurance of their willingness to aid him to the utmost
of their power, in furthering his plans for the good of his future
diocese. All the time that was not taken up by such necessary
occupations as these, he spent with his surviving relations and
friends. His oldest and most valued friend, Mr. Buckworth, he was not
permitted again to meet on earth; for that servant of God died during
the very week, in which the Archdeacon reached the shores of England.

It was whilst visiting his relatives that Archdeacon Corrie writes


                             TO HIS WIFE.

                                                   “June 5, 1835.

     “I have now to tell you that the Archbishop has fixed
     Trinity Sunday, as the day for my consecration. On the 14th
     instant, I expect, therefore, if the Lord will, to be set
     apart as Bishop of Madras. This news I received yesterday;
     and I awoke this morning with such an oppressive feeling
     of the case, as to compel me to arise and pray for relief.
     The Saviour’s grace can render me even an instrument of
     good; and in this consideration alone I find any thing like
     repose.”

Before returning to London, the Archdeacon visited Cambridge, and was
there admitted to his Doctor’s degree, by royal mandate, on the 11th
of June. He proceeded to London on the following day.

The day appointed for his consecration having arrived, he was
admitted to the episcopate by the Archbishop, assisted by the Bishops
of Lichfield, Carlisle, and Bangor; the preacher on the occasion
being the Rev. Josiah Pratt. In a memorandum, in which Dr. Corrie
noted down the particulars of the service in which he had been
engaged, he remarks:--

     “I awoke in the morning at four o’clock, and set myself to
     prayer. I then read in the Epistles to Timothy,[171] and
     the Hebrews, with a view to the service before me, and was
     enabled to realize in a small degree the pardoning mercy
     of God, and to hope for grace in all time to come. I then
     asked for mercies suited to my apprehension of my present
     state; for relatives and friends; and for the Church of
     God at large. During the service at Lambeth, I entered
     with some fixedness, into the sentiments expressed in the
     prayers; and intend to review them frequently, to bring my
     vows to remembrance. When having the robes put on me, the
     language of the Church in Isaiah came to my mind, and I
     prayed to be clothed with the garments of Salvation, and
     the robe of righteousness.

     “Whilst standing before the table in my rochet, I thought
     of Latimer, led to the stake in his long shirt; and, I
     trust, desired to be found faithful unto death.... On the
     whole, I bless God for the grace vouchsafed to me this day,
     and only desire that the impression may remain; which past
     experience teaches me will not be the case, unless Thou,
     O Lord, carry on that, I trust, Thou hast began. ‘Forsake
     not the work of Thine own hand,’ for Jesus’ sake, Amen and
     Amen.”

Soon after his consecration, Bishop Corrie remarks in a letter to his
wife, as he notes also in a memorandum:--

     “I am not yet reconciled to my change of signature. The
     meaning of the change I understand to be, that those
     who are appointed to rule in the church of Christ, take
     the name of that portion of His body (He being Head and
     Bridegroom of the Church) to which they are, in the
     language of Scripture, ‘married.’ If my new name do not
     remind me of allegiance, and tend in some degree, to bind
     me to obedience, it will not operate as it ought to do. I
     find, however, the same old nature still within me, and
     that it changeth not with a name. May a new nature, as well
     as a new name, be wrought in me!”

On the 18th of June, the Bishop had, by special appointment, a
private audience of the king. The account of this interview with King
William IV. was recorded at the time by Bishop Corrie, and is too
characteristic of that kind-hearted sovereign to be omitted:--

     “I went to St. James’ at four o’clock,” observes the
     Bishop, “and had an interview with the king alone. On
     entering his closet, his Majesty came forward, offered
     his hand which, kneeling on one knee, I kissed. He then
     desired me to sit down; and detained me about half an hour.
     Asked, Where I was educated? Where born? How long I had
     been in India? My income? Pension? How long I was going
     out for? My motives in going? Whether I had any relatives,
     &c. Saying, amongst other things, ‘that the Indian Bishops
     ought to have a house: that he did not like the cutting
     down of salaries; feared it would bring back the old
     abuses; expressed a high opinion of the Indian servants
     of government, and much interest in the welfare of India;
     wished me health and strength to perform my duties; told
     me not to remain in India, if my health failed; and said
     he should be happy to hear of a Bishop’s appointment to
     Bombay. He then most graciously dismissed me.”

On Friday the 18th, the Bishop attended the Committee of the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. The Bishops of Lichfield
and Bangor were present; and at the request of the meeting, the
last-named prelate drew up a resolution congratulatory of Dr. C. on
his appointment to Madras, and expressive of the good wishes of the
society towards him; after which he took his leave.

The next day, the Bishop and his daughter went on board a steamer at
the Tower-stairs and joined the “Exmouth,” which was then lying in
the Downs, and in which they had secured a passage to Madras. At four
o’clock that evening, the anchor was raised, and the ship got under
sail for her destination. During the following week, however, they
did not make much way, for on the 26th of June, the Bishop writes


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

                                                   “Off Plymouth.

     “The wind has been contrary, as you will conclude from
     the date of this. It is still contrary, but having now
     sea-room, the pilot is about to leave us. Farewell,
     then, to England, probably for ever; though I have no
     presentiment or resolve on that head. And farewell to
     beloved relatives. How happy are we in the prospect of
     dwelling together in the ‘city which hath foundations!’
     In this, surely, we who have lately met are favoured; and
     truly thankful am I for this communion with you.

           “We’ll praise God for all that is past,
            And trust Him for all that’s to come.”

There were on board the Exmouth, several passengers; among whom were
the Rev. M. Wilkinson and his family, returning to their missionary
labours in India. Besides passengers, were one hundred recruits,
with their officers, proceeding to join H. M. 16th regiment of
foot. On Sundays, as the weather permitted, the Bishop was in the
habit of celebrating divine service on deck, and of admitting daily
to family-prayer in his cabin, as many as chose to attend; whilst
Mr. Wilkinson collected from among the soldiers, a Bible-class of
sixteen, with whom he read the Scriptures every day. In the evening
of the 6th of September, the Exmouth reached the Cape of Good Hope,
where the Bishop had the comfort of finding his wife’s health greatly
recruited. As, also, the Chaplains at the Cape were in expectation
of Bishop Corrie’s return, they had prepared their young people for
Confirmation, and he accordingly administered that rite on the 12th
of September, to 150 candidates. On that day also, his youngest
daughter was married to Mr. George Bird, of the Madras civil service.
On the 13th, the Bishop with his wife and daughter sailed from
Simon’s bay, and reached Madras on the 24th of October. On the same
day, previously to landing, he recorded the following memorandum:--

     “After several days of very slow progress, we are now,
     through God’s goodness, in sight of Madras, but unable
     to go in, until the sea-breeze springs up. Uninterrupted
     mercies have followed me through the voyage home and
     hitherto. Much favour has been shewn to me by many of
     the excellent of the earth. Persons in authority have
     manifested great civility. Supplies forthcoming in the most
     ready manner, and from unlooked-for sources. I trust some
     knowledge on various subjects has been acquired by me, and
     some increased attention to the holy Scriptures. New duties
     now await me, and the prospect often oppresses me, lest I
     fail. Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, and enable
     me to walk humbly with thee. Let no elation, on account of
     outward circumstances, find place in me; nor depression
     on account of conscious inefficiency, prevail to hinder
     me from doing what I can! May I be enabled to order my
     household in a becoming manner. Prepare my ways, O Lord,
     with those in authority; and enable me to act in all things
     as the servant of Jesus Christ!”

Bishop Corrie having landed at Madras on Saturday Oct. 24, was
installed at St. George’s Church, during the morning-service, on the
following Wednesday. Archdeacon Robinson officiated on the occasion.
For the first few weeks after his arrival in Madras, the Bishop
occupied himself almost exclusively in making himself acquainted with
the state of things around him. Thus on the 15th of December, he
writes


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

     “I have been taken up hitherto in exchanging visits of
     civility. I have preached, indeed, in all the churches,
     of which we have six in Madras, and one at the Mount, six
     miles distant. I have, also, visited some of the schools,
     and been making myself acquainted with the state of things
     here as to religion. It is low enough with respect to the
     descendants of Europeans. A district Visiting Society is
     much on my mind, as a means of getting at individuals, in a
     more direct way than has been attempted hitherto. I think
     I begin to see my way in this matter; but feel often much
     oppressed. We have several good men amongst the Chaplains;
     but I am not yet familiarly acquainted with them, and our
     communications are consequently somewhat stiff.

     “Madras is not at all like Calcutta; we live in houses
     surrounded by large gardens. Ours stands in between two or
     three acres, and is quite private, though in the centre of
     the place, and about three miles from the landing-place.
     The surf which breaks on the shore all along the coast, is
     constantly sounding, and at first attracted our notice; but
     it is now become a common thing.

     “The Missions in the south are in much confusion, in
     Tanjore, from the caste question; in Tinnevelly from
     Rhenius’s separation. I am requested to visit them next
     month.”

The question of caste here alluded to, was in truth none other in
principle than that which troubled the Church in the first ages,
(Gal. ii. 3, &c.) and in like manner had created divisions and
heart-burnings among the native Christians at Tanjore. Scarcely had
Bishop Corrie arrived in Madras, before he received a long petition
from some of the native priests, native catechists, schoolmasters
and other native Christians in Tanjore and its vicinity, requesting,
among other things, that the injunctions left by the Bishop of
Calcutta respecting the total abolition of caste, might be somewhat
relaxed. It was with reference to that circumstance, that the Bishop
addressed the following letter to the senior native catechist at
Tanjore:--

                                          “Madras, Dec. 29, 1835.

     “I lately received a letter in the Tamul language, which
     has been translated for me, and purports to be from several
     Christians, inhabitants of the villages over which you
     were formerly Catechist. They express great regret on
     account of your removal, and complain of those who are at
     present placed by the Rev. Missionaries to instruct them.
     It is my purpose, “if the Lord will,” to visit Tanjore
     about the middle of January, when I will endeavour to
     ascertain what is the true character of the Catechists
     complained of, and will take such measures respecting them
     as the case may require. In the mean time, you will be so
     good as to make known this my purpose to the parties who
     wrote the letter. I wish at the same time, to beg of you,
     who have so long been a teacher of the mercy of God to
     others, to consider anew the question of caste. Can you
     hold it as a Christian principle that God is a respecter
     of persons, and that those who are high-born, can, on that
     account, claim to come first to the table of the Lord?
     No man of any caste, who is an unbeliever, or an immoral
     person, or profane breaker of any of the commandments of
     God, ought to be permitted to come at all to the Lord’s
     Supper; and I am certain that due respect will always be
     shewn to respectable Christians, by true Christians who
     may be inferior to them in temporal circumstances. But
     you will not, I think, wish to maintain that any one can
     claim precedence in spiritual things, merely on account
     of natural birth or any outward distinction. I need not
     quote to you the scriptures, that in the Lord Jesus, “there
     is neither circumcision, nor uncircumcision, Barbarian,
     Scythian, bond nor free;” but “as many as received Him, to
     them gives he power to become the sons of God.”

     “I pray God that you and others, who are leaders in
     the Lord’s army, may candidly consider this point in a
     purely Christian view, and without reference to any past
     proceedings. I desire to come among you as a peace-maker,
     and restore harmony among you if I can. I greatly lament
     the distress which many, I hear, are suffering; and if
     you, who are leaders, will meet me in the spirit of
     Christian love, some of the distress may be removed. Not
     only, therefore, in regard to the purity of the Christian
     doctrine, but from love, also, to your countrymen and
     fellow-christians, I hope you will be for peace.”

The separation of Mr. Rhenius at Tinnevelly, from the Church
mission at that place, had occurred before Bishop Corrie reached
Madras. It appears that early in 1835, Mr. Rhenius had most
unjustifiably published a tract for the purpose of impugning the
government, ritual, and discipline, of the Church of England,
notwithstanding that he stood connected as a missionary with the
Church Missionary Society. However painful it might therefore be,
to that Society, to dissolve their connection with a person who had
for twenty years zealously laboured as a missionary, yet, under
the circumstances of the case, they felt bound in consistency, as
conscientious members of the Church of England, to declare that the
relationship which had hitherto subsisted between Mr. Rhenius and
the Society was at an end. In this decision Mr. Rhenius readily
acquiesced, and quitted Tinnevelly in June 1835, having previously
delivered over all the concerns of the Church-mission there, to the
Society’s representative. Within a few months, however, Mr. Rhenius
thought proper to return to Tinnevelly, at the invitation of some
dissatisfied catechists; and the natural consequence was, that the
whole mission at that place underwent a change from a state of
organization and peace, to a scene of strife and disorder. It was
with the hope that some remedy might be suggested for this lamentable
state of things, that the Bishop thought it of importance that he
should ascertain personally what might be done for peace and order.

     “I go,” he observes, in a Letter to his brother, “at much
     personal and pecuniary inconvenience. It will cost me £100;
     but my instructions are called for, and I cannot direct in
     the dark. I go with much fear and distrust of myself; but
     by calm investigation, and taking no hasty steps, I trust I
     may effect some good.”

In a memorandum which the Bishop made January 2, 1836, in the
prospect of the journey, he states:--

     “I have examined the Madras Asylum, both male and female;
     and the high school at Vepery. Examined also, the native
     girls’ school of the Church Missionary Society. In all of
     them a very considerable knowledge of Scripture is found. I
     have received Mr. Hickey, as a Missionary to the Portuguese
     congregation of the Vepery Mission; and am endeavouring to
     bring about a district Visiting Society for Black Town, and
     to have the Church-building fund confined to this Diocese;
     which seems agreeable to all I have met with, who wish well
     to the object. I have taken steps towards issuing marriage
     licences. In all this, there is all the prosperity I could
     desire: yet never at one period have my trials been so
     great. The experience of that Pope, who is said to have
     doubted of his salvation, more and more, as he advanced in
     the Orders of his Church, till having gained the highest
     step, he utterly despaired, sickened and died, has been
     much on my mind.... Frequently I awake in the night with a
     feeling of dismay inexpressible, as to what may be the end
     of myself, and in respect of the objects contemplated by
     my office. Intending to visit Tanjore and Tinnevelly, I am
     at a loss utterly how to proceed, or what to attempt. I am
     indeed oppressed: O Lord, undertake for me. I will still
     thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord!”

It was on the 11th of January 1836, that Bishop Corrie left Madras on
his mission of peace. The incidents connected with this journey are
related in the following correspondence with his wife and family, or
in occasional memoranda:--

     “Sadras, Jan. 12, 1836. I arrived here at 4 o’clock this
     morning, just 11 hours after the Palkee left home, and this
     included the passage of the river after I left you, and
     the delay at the first stage of nearly half an hour. The
     bearers therefore, travel faster here than in our country:
     they do not change shoulders so often, but go generally a
     swinging step, which is very uneasy. The road lay all the
     way within sound of the surf, and here the Bungalow is not
     above a gun-shot from the sea. There is one old fort, and
     many descendants of Dutch, all very poor; the Bungalow
     is in very nice order, and has accommodation for three
     parties. A Colonel, his wife, and some children, with an
     Ayah,[172] came in about 7; they have two rooms, and I
     one, but we see nothing of each other. Notwithstanding the
     noise of the bearers, and the jolting of the Palkee, I
     slept a good deal, and had a nap after arriving, although a
     disturbed one. Fish and eggs were provided for breakfast,
     and I am as comfortable as I can be from home; but I feel
     much a stranger and very lonely. My thoughts are often with
     you all, and heavy thoughts also arise as to the result of
     my journey. The more the state of the Tanjore people is
     enquired into, the more difficult it appears to deal with
     them. Their teachers have countenanced much that is wrong
     among them, by administering among them, without reproving
     their errors; from which they at length have concluded
     themselves blameless; and in looking over the list of
     charges urged against them, many seem matters of choice,
     which we all observe or not according to taste. May He in
     whom alone is wisdom and strength, give me both to perceive
     and to know what things I ought to stipulate for, and grace
     faithfully to fulfil the same; and may He ‘turn the hearts
     of the disobedient’ among them, ‘to the wisdom of the
     just!’”

     “Myaveram, Jan. 14. I arrived here at half past six, and
     having changed my clothes and reposed a little, purpose
     giving you a brief sketch of my journey thus far. I am in
     the house of Sir Henry Montgomery, the deputy Collector
     of Tanjore, but have not yet seen him or his lady. The
     whole way I have come is, as to country, not only without
     interest but very dreary; partly I suppose, that being
     along shore, the sea air is unfavourable to vegetation.
     The road was to Sadras firm and good, after that to
     Pondicherry, partly sandy, and partly lakes of water,
     and partly on the very brink of the sea. Since leaving
     Cuddalore, at first sandy and heavy, then stiff soil, but
     no made road; and it took twelve hours to travel about
     thirty-six miles. We crossed four pretty broad rivers
     during last night; two of them branches of the Coleroon, a
     name renowned in Orme’s account of Hindoostan, and which I
     little expected ever to behold. On two of the rivers are
     ferry boats, provided by Government, good and substantial;
     but all the other boats I have been obliged to use are
     both comparatively small and very fragile. The water has
     nowhere been deep, though enough to give a good ducking.
     The Coleroon even might have been passed by wading, but
     the bearers professed fear of Alligators. The song of the
     bearers continues the same all the way as at Madras.

     “One mode of adorning their temples, is peculiar to this
     part of India. Near a Hindoo Pagoda on this side Sadras,
     I observed a colossal figure of a man seated on a throne.
     For a time I could not make out what it could be. Yesterday
     morning, the same kind of figure presented itself with
     a spearman on each side standing by it, and in front a
     huge figure of a horse. Yesterday evening, passing near a
     shady grove there seemed to be a row of tigers guarding
     the entrance, which in the gloom of the twilight appeared
     at first very formidable: and just before I reached my
     present position, a row of elephants, and figures of men on
     horseback, seemed to guard the entrance to a temple; and
     behind were figures as of a flock of sheep. This is all I
     have seen new on my way. This place is like a garden in
     not quite a wilderness, for the country seems fertile, but
     irregularly cultivated; and a pretty lawn with a variety
     of flowers in front, gives a lovely appearance, to my
     eye, which has seen nothing like it since leaving Madras.
     I must not, however, disparage Cuddalore; but it is an
     old regularly formed town, with 300 European pensioners
     scattered about it, besides the gentry, civil and military.
     I passed yesterday from half past 9 till half past 4,
     gaining useful information on missionary matters. Contrary
     to my former experience on this point. I sleep a good deal
     during the night, so as to require no sleep during the day.

     “Twelve o’clock. At breakfast, met Sir Henry and his lady.
     They are nice young people, and both seem very happy
     and intelligent. They have been here five years, quite
     sequestered: he has been eleven years in the service, but
     looks considerably younger, with fine speaking eyes. They
     go home next year on furlough. They make me very welcome,
     and I have a nice apartment, all in the bungalow style.
     Tanjore forty miles: I am to be driven part of the way
     in the evening. The christian Catechist, and some of his
     people have been to see me; about 600 young and old are
     under christian instruction.

     “I am not yet half on my way; the distance looks at times
     dreary, and the old idea of dragging a lengthened chain,
     applies a little to my case. May duty prevail as it ought,
     and my chains will feel proportionably lighter! Think of me
     when on your knees!

     “Tanjore, January 17. Intending to proceed at bedtime
     to Trichinopoly, I leave this for to-night’s post; as
     otherwise several days would intervene before you hear
     of me again--the distance to Trichinopoly is thirty-six
     miles. On Friday I had a busy day with the Missionaries,
     ascertaining the number and state of their congregations,
     accounts of their proceedings &c. Yesterday I was occupied
     almost the whole day with the Nonconformists: at one
     time, and for about two hours, the room was quite full of
     them. It was a time of great anxiety to me, hearing their
     objections, and answering them. The task was not difficult,
     but the point I stood upon was the duty of attending the
     Lord’s Supper, without regard to who else might be present.
     I stated that the bread represents our Lord’s body, and
     the wine his blood, which he offered on the cross for our
     redemption. In communicating, we are to think only of the
     Saviour, whose memorial is before us; and in receiving
     the bread and wine, we receive Christ as the author of
     our salvation. But if I refuse to receive the emblems
     of the Saviour because another has partaken before me, I
     lose sight of the Saviour, and treat the bread and wine as
     common food. This they could not get over, and I am led
     to hope, most of them will yield this point, and if so,
     I shall have to thank God for having come. If not I have
     done what I could in this matter. Through God’s goodness
     I am quite well to-day and preparing to preach in English
     at half-past ten; and to attend family service at four P.
     M.--Evening. The congregation in the morning was about
     fifty, besides many natives, who understand English. I
     have been addressing the native congregation through Mr.
     Coombes: may a blessing follow from above!

     “January 19th. I received yours of the 15th, yesterday,
     at Trichinopoly, and sat down to answer it, but was
     interrupted. I wrote you from Tanjore most of the
     particulars of my visit there. There is nothing to see
     but the fruits of Swartz’s labours in two Churches, and
     the many called by the name of Christ among the natives.
     Mr. Coombes is invaluable there from his knowledge of
     Tamil, and the right spirit he manifests. I arrived there
     yesterday morning soon after six: every thing was done for
     my comfort. I went before breakfast to the Church, which
     was near, and saw Heber’s grave, which will long render
     Trichinopoly a place of interest.

     “Trichinopoly is a large station, with good roads about it.
     Both at Tanjore, and there, the chief city is within the
     Fort, which at Trichinopoly encompasses a pyramidical hill,
     on the top of which is a house of imposing appearance, a
     kind of monastery of Brahmins. I write this at a staging
     bungalow, half way to Madura. I have here an invitation
     from Mr. Blackburn the Judge of Madura; and the Cutwal has
     been ordered to shew me all attention. On arriving I was
     saluted with the rattling of tom-toms, and four or five
     native hautboys and the Tahsildar[173] came after breakfast
     to wait upon me with like state. The bungalow stands in a
     valley surrounded by irregular hills, something like those
     at Chunar. The climate is cool, and at night cold. The
     cause of so much coolness in this latitude, must rise from
     the sea on the east, and the ghauts on the west. I am now
     forty miles from the sea, having been verging inland ever
     since leaving Cuddalore.

     “Madura, Wednesday morning. I arrived here at two this
     morning, and have had some hours quiet sleep in a fine
     upper room. I have not yet seen Mr. Blackburn, but every
     thing around is in the most comfortable style of an Indian
     Judge. The country all around is flat, with a continuation
     of irregular detached hills as yesterday. The night
     travelling quite unhinges my frame, as the hand-writing
     shews. I shall become more steady after a meal. This place
     is worth describing, but the post goes to Madras at eight,
     so I have not time.

     “Jan. 21. I am now through God’s goodness within sixty
     miles of Palamcottah; another night’s run will, proceeding
     as I have done, bring me to my journey’s end, outward
     bound. I yesterday sent off a letter for you from Madura.
     The collector, Mr. Blackburn, was as kind as possible. He
     invited the other three civilians to tiffin. There were
     two officers with a detachment, at some distance, and four
     American missionaries whom I did not see. The Judge has an
     infant, whom I am to baptize on my way back, and there are
     children of writers, &c., desirous of the same. None of our
     Bishops came so far south; so that I am the first who has
     visited these parts. Alas, how inadequate to meet public
     expectation!

     “Mr. Blackburn’s house is one of the best in the country.
     To the south of it is a large sheet of water, and a small
     island in the midst, with a truly picturesque temple upon
     it. Madura is famous in Hindoo Mythology. A grand festival
     is to be held on 1st February, when the idol will be
     brought from the temple at some distance, and take a sail
     on the lake and visit the summer-house on the island.
     About a lac of people generally collect on the occasion. I
     have seen several temples, all in the style of Juggernauth
     for size.

     “At Madura, as at Trichinopoly, the temple is within the
     fort, and the town is there. The country all along very
     interesting, and the population very scanty. In the rains,
     the face of the country must be covered with water, it
     is so flat; and now there are little streams and rills
     constantly occurring. These are fed by the water from
     the hills to the westward, and for six years the supply
     has been very scanty. This year the rain has fallen
     plentifully, and crops of all kind, but principally rice,
     are abundant. The people are beginning to gather in the
     rice. They are at work in a threshing-place close to the
     staging bungalow. I feel very lonely to-day, though in much
     peace--my mind has been much with you all during the night.

     “Palamcottah, Friday.--At the end of my journey. I now
     begin to look back, and the way seems not so long as did
     the distance I have come. I was going on as usual, and had
     fallen asleep when the Palkee was set down at two, and I
     was told Mr. Tucker was come. He had kindly come out about
     ten miles; we returned about two miles, when the whole
     body of catechists were standing on each side the way, and
     received us with a song of praise. I got out and thanked
     them for their congratulations, expressing my wishes for
     their prosperity. We then came on a tumultuous cavalcade,
     and reached the mission-house at twenty minutes past four.
     Mr. Tucker prayed, and I went to rest for two hours. We
     breakfasted at eight, after family worship. After that,
     ten divisions of catechists and schoolmasters, came in
     rotation to make _salaam_. They marched in, singing a verse
     of praise. Flowers were scattered on my head, and gold and
     silver stars; some of which I made Joseph gather, when
     all were gone, to bring to Anna. The English residents
     have been to see me also; you know that bustle rather
     upsets than gratifies me. My feelings have rather been
     blunted than pleased by all this; and a feeling of my own
     utter worthlessness before God keeps me low, as also of
     unprofitableness towards men.

     “January 25th. My purpose is to stay here over Sunday next,
     to be at Madura on Tuesday; Trichinopoly on Thursday; and
     at Tanjore, till the Sunday evening following. On the
     Monday, Mayaveram; Tuesday, at Porto Nova; Wednesday at
     Cuddalore. Perhaps stay there till Monday evening. Friday,
     at Sadras; and on Saturday, February 12th, at _Dulce
     Domum_. Such is my purpose: may God of his goodness dispose
     accordingly!

     “Yesterday we had morning service in English, and in the
     afternoon, in Tamil. I preached both times, the latter you
     will judge, by an interpreter--the native congregation
     about 500. Mr. Rhenius’s proceedings are of the most
     injurious kind. He is either blinded by self-love, or most
     miserably misinformed, which must be his own fault; but
     I have not time to-day for particulars. We are all going
     to dine with Mr. and Mrs. Prendergast; Mr. P. is also
     here. Till this moment I have been occupied with about 200
     catechists and school-masters.”

The following remarks on the state of the Tinnevelly Mission, occur
among the Bishop’s private memoranda:--

                                     “Palamcottah, Jan. 28, 1836.

     “I have been here now seven days, and have been
     endeavouring to form a distinct idea of the circumstances
     of this Mission. It appears, that from the first,
     expectations of redress of wrongs have been held out to
     such natives as sought aid from the Missionaries. Hence
     a Vakeel[174] has been employed at the charge of the
     mission, to ascertain particulars of complaint, and to
     make representations accordingly to the Tahsildars and in
     the cutchery[175] of the collector. And this practice
     has so increased, that Mr. Pettitt is chiefly occupied
     in hearing and arranging the temporal affairs of native
     applicants. The consequence has been that whole villages,
     or the greater part of the inhabitants of some villages,
     have “come over,” as the expression is, at once, to put
     themselves under Christian instruction ostensibly, but at
     the same time, to enjoy the protection referred to. Of
     the many thus reported, comparatively few have received
     baptism. In one village of 600, only forty are baptized.

     “On enquiring of the assembled inspecting Catechists
     to-day, ‘How it came to pass, that of so many reported
     under Christian instruction, for several years, so few were
     really baptized?’--the answer given was, ‘Partly from the
     inattention or bad example of the Catechists; partly, that
     many being disappointed in their expectations of worldly
     benefit, drew back to heathenism; or, having obtained their
     object, became satisfied, and were not desirous of baptism.’

     “It appears that little or no distinction is observed
     in the treatment of the baptized, and unbaptized. The
     Catechist marries the unbaptized when called upon, and also
     the baptized. In both cases a charm is put on the neck
     of the female, instead of a ring on the finger. The same
     services are observed at the burial of the baptized and
     unbaptized; except that in the former case, going to the
     house of the deceased, and more ceremony is observed. Some
     do not use the Church service over the unbaptized, but pray
     extempore. Mr. Rhenius in the early part of his Mission,
     used the service of the Church of England in baptism; and
     confirmed some young persons by the imposition of hands,
     as directed in our Confirmation-service; but afterwards
     omitted our forms altogether.

     “The children of converts seem not to have been attended
     to, after the Scripture rule. Some persons having families,
     were reported, by a Catechist, as baptized seven years
     ago. Their children, neither then, nor since baptized.
     It seems that Mr. Rhenius has sent to all his Catechists
     and School-masters to come and pay their respects to the
     Bishop; and accordingly a considerable number came after
     breakfast. On Mr. Dent having called, I explained that I
     was the Inspector of the Church of England’s Missions; and
     that they having left it, what had I to do with them? One
     very plausibly answered, ‘That they worshipped the same
     Lord, and held the same faith, and preached the same Gospel
     as before.’ I asked if nothing was said in Scripture of
     the sin of schism? They answered, ‘Yes.’ I then said, ‘Was
     there no sin, that when one man in a village beat the drum
     to call the people to prayers, another should beat the
     same drum? When one began to pray, another should begin to
     pray?’ They owned this was wrong; but attempted to lay the
     blame on the Church Missionary Society’s catechists: but I
     observed from the case of the young man who came before me
     the other day, (a catechist of Mr. Rhenius’) that he had
     owned that he held public worship, at the same time with
     the Church Missionary catechist. A long examination of
     persons followed, which, with information before received,
     led me to address the party as follows:--‘That for fifteen
     years past, the word of God had been made known, and spread
     abroad in these parts by means of the Church Missionary
     Society. That many had become enlightened with the light
     of life. That Mr. Rhenius had been supplied during that
     time, with funds as a Missionary of the Church Missionary
     Society. That having separated from the Society, he left
     the place; and that during his absence all was peace in
     the mission. That the young man present, who wrote the
     letter, stating that the congregations were wishing for
     his return, admitted that he did not of his own knowledge
     write thus, but that the catechists, who signed the letter,
     told him so. That some of the Head-men whose names were
     affixed to the letter, told me, ‘that they knew not that
     it was a letter of recal, but [thought it] only a friendly
     letter of congratulation on his arrival at Arcot. That one
     of the inspecting catechists (then present, and now in
     Mr. Rhenius’ employment) had confessed having expressed to
     Mr. Tucker his sorrow for having signed the letter to Mr.
     Rhenius; and that he did not know that it was an invitation
     to come back, having read only a part of it; and was not
     aware how bad a man David Pillay is:--That a head-man
     present, had confessed just now, that if Mr. Pettit would
     have let him the land, and the palmyra-trees at Dobnavoor,
     for the money he wished (viz. four Rs. instead of ten Rs.)
     he would not have joined Mr. Rhenius:--That several other
     of Mr. Rhenius’ people present, had owned [to] having been,
     at different times, convicted of delinquencies:--That Mr.
     Rhenius had been told of the deceits practised upon him,
     but he would not believe it of those who invited him back.
     These things, in my presence, had been confessed by them:
     but he had come back, and all this division had followed.
     The Society would therefore never receive Mr. Rhenius
     again. That, for myself, I could not but grieve to think,
     how, in this way, Satan had prevailed to hinder the success
     of the gospel. That now the heathen laughed, and said, ‘The
     preachers of the Gospel of Peace, are quarrelling amongst
     themselves.’ That for those present, who by deceiving Mr.
     Rhenius, and bringing him back, had been the occasion
     of this evil, I should pray that God would give them
     repentance, that they might seek the pardon of this their
     great sin, and not finally perish among the unbelievers.”

The Bishop adds:--

     “In one case of ninety-nine families, in two adjoining
     villages, only three families are baptized; and in some
     congregations not an individual is baptized.”

Two days after the date of this memorandum, the Bishop prepared to
leave Palamcottah. He writes


                             TO HIS WIFE.

                                                  “Jan. 30, 1836.

     “My _dawk_ is ordered for to-morrow evening, so that
     I begin to think of myself as on my way home again. I
     know not well whether any good has been accomplished by
     my visit, except convincing the people that the Church
     Missionary Society will not abandon the mission. The agents
     of Mr. R. had circulated far and wide that such would be
     the case. There is no end to the falsehoods propagated by
     his agents, and to which he gave indirect occasion.

     “I have seen nothing of the country around, but from just
     a little evening’s drive; yet towards the west it is said
     to be interesting as to scenery, being towards the Ghauts.
     I am no hand at drawing, as you know, but this sketch will
     give you some idea of this station.”


                                      “Feb. 1, Stageing Bungalow.

     “Fifty-two miles on the way to Madras, and in good health.
     Thanks be to God! The dreariness of this place answers very
     well to my state of mind, and gives opportunity for looking
     back.... Mr. Peet and Mr. Bailey came over from Travancore.

     “After the Bishop of Calcutta had been there and had
     plainly spoken out what reforms were considered necessary
     for the clergy, the two Metrans collected a hasty synod
     of their Church, and voted in a violent manner that they
     would have no reform, nor anything further to do with the
     missionaries. In consequence the labors of twenty years
     seem come to nothing. It is now, I believe, intended that
     the missionaries shall teach and preach as opportunity
     offers. If any of the clergy reform, of which they have now
     some hope, their way will be plain; but it remains to be
     seen. It had become necessary for Mr. Tucker to go over to
     see the Resident, and consult with him as to the protection
     it may be in his power, or be right for him to afford, to
     those who may turn from their errors to the truth. Mr. T.
     will not be above a week or ten days after me at Madras.

     “Yesterday, I ordained John Devasagayam, priest. Mr. Tucker
     preached, and Messrs. Blackman, Pettitt, Peet, and Bailey,
     with Mr. Tucker, joined in the imposition of hands. The
     service was all new to me; I had to look out my places,
     which took my attention too much off from the sentiments
     expressed in the service. It was, however, on the whole a
     day of seriousness, and I hope of blessing. John preached
     in the evening in Tamil; his text was appropriate,
     Ephesians vi, 18, 19. I was told he gave a sketch of his
     training under Dr. John, the colleague of good Dr. Rottler
     at Tranquebar; and related the circumstances of his
     conversion, desired the congregation to pray for him, &c.

     “After social prayer with the mission family and the
     catechists, I came away at half-past-eight. I arrived here,
     fifty-two miles, by nine this morning. By this you will
     judge how well these bearers carry; they go three before
     and three behind, and their stages are generally about
     twenty miles and sometimes thirty; which they accomplish
     without seeming at all distressed. To-morrow, d. v. I have
     some children to baptize at Madura, and then onward in the
     evening towards Trichinopoly, from whence I purpose writing
     again.”


                               “Verully Malay, Feb. 3, 1836.[176]

     “I am to-day at a stageing Bungalow in the Tondeman’s
     country,--the title of an independent prince who retains
     his paternal inheritance independent of the Company, in
     name, and he is wise enough to be quiet, collect his own
     revenue, and live at peace with the lion. Yesterday, I
     sent off a letter to your beloved mother from Madura, and
     which I hope is before me; but am not certain, as I have
     come on pretty quick. I mentioned, in going from hence,
     a beautiful lake with a very tasty summer-house, on an
     Island in the middle of it,--in front of the Collector’s
     house at Madura. Yesterday was the annual Festival of
     the Idol at Madura; a float, with a very splendid temple
     erected upon it, was prepared on the lake. A gentleman
     present said it was like the Chinese Temples erected
     in St. James’s Park, when the allied Sovereigns were
     in England. The Idol was brought with great noise, and
     amidst a large concourse of people, from the Temple in
     the fort, above a mile distant, and placed on the float,
     which was then drawn by ropes, from the shore, twice round
     the lake. After a rest, the float was drawn towards the
     Island, where the Idol was to pass the evening, and the
     Temple and the entire bank of the lake to be illuminated
     at night. Vast crowds were going towards Madura, as I
     came away, to see the illumination; and all the Europeans
     were to be at Mr. Blackburne’s to view the sight. I felt
     no inducement to stay. Colonel Maclean was there with the
     Tondeman, as resident. Two American missionaries who were
     settled at Madura, came to breakfast, and staid till 11
     o’clock conversing on missionary subjects. They are very
     self-denying and persevering in their labours: I was much
     taken with them. Two others of their party were gone to
     Ceylon for change, having lost their wives at Madura,
     within three months of their landing. I baptized a child
     of Mr. Hooper, the Judge, and saw the catechist of the
     Propagation Society. There is a branch of the Tanjore
     mission here, which has been much neglected of late
     years,--the Lord’s Supper has not been administered during
     two years past. I saw Mr. Rosen, the missionary of that
     Society in Tinnevelly. His sphere of labour is about 20
     miles distant from Palamcottah. He came hither to see me,
     and brought me a statement of his mission. He is a Dane by
     nation, and a good man, but is deaf and quite inadequate
     to be alone.... The people of Tanjore are in a deplorable
     state of apathy, and want of spiritual life. I came away
     from Madura before 5 P. M., and reached my halting-stage
     by five this morning, when the bearers being ready, I
     came on hither, and am only 20 miles from Trichinopoly. I
     expect to be there by nine this evening, and to enjoy a
     comfortable bed at Mr. Blair’s, which I rather anticipate;
     for three disturbed nights add considerably to the natural
     tremulousness of my frame.”


                                 “Trichinopoly, Thursday morning.

     “I arrived here last night just at gun-fire. Mrs. Blair
     is, it seems, so much better as to have gone to the
     neighbourhood for change of air, and Mr. B. is with her;
     but everything was ready for me here, and I was glad to go
     at once to bed. This morning early, I was roused by the
     sweet sound of ‘fairy-like music:’ though, to be sure,
     the great drum rather dissipated the idea of fairies. The
     European barrack is, I find, near; but the most joyous
     event, is a letter this morning from Mr. Bainbridge, saying
     you are all well.”


                             TO HIS WIFE.

                                          “Tanjore, Feb. 6, 1836.

     “You will know, I passed the whole of Thursday and
     yesterday, at Mr. Blair’s at Trichinopoly; he seems a very
     valuable man. There are fifteen families or so, who meet
     together on Tuesday evenings for religious improvement;
     and among the soldiers there is a Wesleyan, and a Church
     of England Society. In the latter, there are several of
     the officers of H. M. Regiment, who meet the men, and
     read prayers and a sermon. Finding there were so many
     pious people at the Station, I told the Chaplain we would
     have service last night. Accordingly, at a quarter past
     6, we assembled in the church: there were not so few as
     100 soldiers, and the church appeared filled, though
     not crowded, with officers and their families. My text
     was Psalm cxxx. 4. A chair was placed for me by the
     Communion-table, upon Heber’s grave. I was tired in body,
     and could feel nothing on any subject; but it was a very
     solemn occasion to me, that he, one of the flowers of human
     nature, should have been cut down so seemingly prematurely,
     and I, a withered stalk, left and put into his place.
     Surely God’s ways are not as man’s ways! From Heber all
     good of which man is capable, might have been expected,
     whilst I can only say, ‘my desire is to the remembrance of
     Thy name.’--He perfects strength in human weakness, and
     by things foolish in the eye of carnal reason, humbles
     man’s pride, and causes it to be acknowledged that the
     ‘excellency of the power is of Himself.’ This is my only,
     but--blessed be God!--my sufficient consolation in my
     office. May God make manifest his strength in my weakness!

     “Did I tell you I went one evening to the Fort at
     Palamcottah, and had service with the few artillerymen?
     They seemed most attentive, and some of them much moved;
     and last Sunday some of them came to Church, though not
     ordered, and knelt in prayer, and appeared very attentive.
     Who knows but the arrow, shot at a venture, may fix a
     saving conviction in them? May it prove so!”


                                       “Tanjore, Feby. 7th, 1836.

     “I have had a very fatiguing morning. At half-past seven
     we went to Tamil service; after morning prayer I preached
     on the latter part of 1 Cor. xi. Mr. Coombes interpreting
     for me. After service the Lord’s Supper was administered
     to upwards of 200 Native christians. Among them were three
     of the hitherto nonconformists, the most intelligent of
     the whole christian community; Pakianaden the native
     judge, Warswasyanaden, the native priest; and Thomas,
     head catechist. What effect their conformity will have
     on the rest, remains to be seen; but my object in coming
     hither at this time seems gained. Thanks to God! There
     is a disposition, I fear, to require personal apologies
     from them: if this is done, more inconvenience will
     arise; and surely we should be content, if the _principle_
     of caste be yielded by them. The service was not over
     till after eleven. I feel that if I were to attend the
     afternoon-service, and preach as intended, I should
     probably have fever; and, with the journey before me, I
     remain at home all the afternoon.

     “Monday. The country generally is uninteresting and thinly
     peopled, but all last night we seemed passing through a
     town: the fertility of the Tanjore country is proverbial.
     Soon after day, we arrived at a village where all was
     bustle and activity: it is their Idol festival. A car very
     much decorated, and much more in the style of a triumphal
     car than any they have in the north, was being dragged
     through the street, with frequent discharges of heavy
     pieces, or fireworks. The bearers took me down a lane
     to avoid the crowd, or perhaps that my _feringee_[177]
     presence might not offend the god. I am staying over the
     day on the border of the Tanjore country. In the evening
     cross the Coleroon, and shall reach Porto Novo by nine
     or ten. Last night I slept very little--my thoughts were
     much with you. Sir H. Montgomery has sent a peon[178] to
     attend me through each of the three stages under him: this
     civility saves me trouble, and secures what I may want.

     “Tuesday. Porto Novo. This is a very interesting place,
     close on the sea. I proceed to Cuddalore this evening and
     from thence, to-morrow, go to Sadras. I shall not probably
     write again, as I shall be as soon at Madras as the post.”

The Bishop reached Madras on the 12th of February, but not without
having suffered from the fatigue inseparable from so long a journey.
He considered himself, however, to have been amply compensated for
all the expence and exhaustion which he had encountered, since, if
no other good should result, his visit to Palamcottah and Tanjore had
brought to light the real state of the missions there. With reference
therefore to that subject, he writes


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                          “Madras, Feb. 17, 1836.

     “We have many hundred Native christians here, and in the
     provinces to the southward, many thousands; but they are
     in a most deplorably low state as to true religion.... In
     Tanjore, of nearly 5,000 professed christians, scarcely
     one is known to be spiritually-minded; and in Tinnevelly,
     of the 10,000 reported christians, very few indeed are
     really converted to God. Of them all, not above 2,000 men,
     women and children included, are baptized, though all are
     treated as christians. The old missions in that quarter
     are also in a low state; and in the most southern point
     3,000 descendants of the first converts have returned to
     heathenism, and are more opposed to attempts at their
     conversion than those who never heard of Christ....
     Afflicting as is the state of these people, there is no
     room for discouragement. We must endeavour to do them good
     with more simplicity and diligence. I have heard here of
     a very characteristic remark of Bishop Turner. When asked
     what he thought of the Tanjore christians? He answered,
     That he thought the best way of dealing with them would be,
     to excommunicate them all, and begin the work of conversion
     anew.”

The causes which mainly contributed to this state of things seem
to have been, the worldly advantages and protection connected with
the profession of christianity in Southern India, and the want of
a sufficient number of competent missionaries. Worldly advantages
have always been found to call forth the duplicity of the native
character, and to lead them for unworthy ends to place themselves
under christian instruction.[179] In this case the number of
self-seekers seems to have been so great, that, with every desire
to do so, it became utterly impracticable for a few missionaries to
give adequate attention to every individual native who might offer
himself for instruction. The employment of, and trusting to, native
catechists became thus unavoidable, to a much greater extent than
under different circumstances could have happened. Then, as these in
their turn betrayed the confidence placed in them, by practising as
much deception as the pretended catechumens could do; and as those
who visited these localities on behalf of the missionary societies,
could in most cases hold intercourse with the natives themselves,
only through an interpreter, the inspectors of the mission were
the more easily misled by outward appearances, and interested
representations. It were doubtless no difficult matter to suggest,
that if a greater degree of caution had been used in the first
instance, on the part of the missionaries, some of the evils which
the Bishop found in operation might have been prevented; but it is to
be feared that the blame must ultimately rest on that lukewarmness
in christians, which has never yet supplied missionaries in numbers
at all commensurate with the magnitude of the work to be done; nor
funds adequate to the efficient support of the few missionaries who
have gone forth.


      [168] A row-boat covered at one end.

      [169] The rush of the spring-tide up the river. The
            elevation of the wave thus occasioned, is very
            considerable; and the noise and rapidity of the rush
            is appalling.

      [170] It was erroneously asserted at the time that the
            usual appellation of courtesy was not to be assigned
            to the suffragan Bishops of India.

      [171] Mr. Pratt preached from 1 Tim. ii. 1-4; and the
            Sermon was afterwards printed by the Archbishop’s
            command.

      [172] Native nurse.

      [173] Chief Native Revenue and Police Officer.

      [174] A kind of Law Agent.

      [175] Office.

      [176] Addressed to his daughter.

      [177] European.

      [178] Messenger--servant.

      [179] See above pp. 404, 405.




                            CHAPTER XXI.

     CHURCH-BUILDING FUND--SUBSCRIPTIONS FOR THE IRISH CLERGY--THE
       MADRAS GRAMMAR SCHOOL--MEMORIAL TO GOVERNMENT--PRIMARY
       VISITATION--DEATH OF MRS. CORRIE--ORDINATION--DEATH OF BISHOP
       CORRIE.


On the return of the Bishop from Tanjore and Tinnevelly, he took
measures for securing that certain subscriptions collected in
Madras, toward the building of churches, and which had hitherto
been transmitted to Calcutta, to the “fund for all India,” should
henceforth be vested in Trustees, and be applied, under the direction
of diocesan and local committees, exclusively to the wants of the
presidency of Madras. The Bishop, also, in addition to his other
occupations, preached every Wednesday afternoon during Lent at the
church in the Fort, and on Friday evenings at the Cathedral. In a
letter which relates these circumstances, the Bishop also observes


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                                  “April 5, 1836.

     “A movement has lately taken place among the East Indian
     community which indicates improvement. Arrangements are
     being attempted for establishing an Indian Missionary
     Society. One rule is to be, that no missionary engaged
     by them shall receive above eighty Rs. a month, and as
     much less as may be. This, originating with themselves,
     looks well, but nothing is yet settled, nor any formal
     announcement of the Society.”

The provisional Committee, however, of this projected Indian
Missionary Society, soon afterwards issued an outline of their plan
of operations, which was of the so-called liberal dissenting caste.

As the story of the persecutions and sufferings of the Irish clergy,
had by this time reached India, it is scarcely necessary to say that
Bishop Corrie sympathised deeply with those his brethren, in their
afflictions. Thus he writes


                            TO MR. SHERER.

                                           “Madras, July 4, 1836.

     “I was requested by some friends to call a meeting[180] to
     consider on means for relieving the Irish Clergy. A failure
     was predicted, but £300 were subscribed in the room, and
     sent to the Archbishop of Armagh, by the last ship: £400
     more have been since received by our treasurer; and by the
     end of the month we expect to receive in all 10,000 Rs.”

The Bishop then goes on to state, that

     “What seems of most importance to this place, is the
     establishment of a Grammar school. About four years ago I
     wrote, or authorised Mr. M. to write, for a master for the
     Calcutta High School. Mr. M. and I, when I was at home,
     talked over the subject of a master, and he renewed his
     enquiries, and found one. Amidst my many new avocations,
     the subject had quite escaped me, till I received an
     official notice from the High School Committee, that they
     did not require a master, and should not receive the one
     engaged, nor honour Mr. M’s draft for his passage. At first
     I was in trouble, but friends here viewed this refusal
     as providential for Madras. The Bishop of Calcutta sent
     me 1000 Rs. to pay the passage-money, on the young man’s
     arrival in the Juliana. He agreed to remain here, and we
     fulfilled all his expectations from Calcutta. On the 1st
     inst. the school commenced, near Mr. Tucker’s Chapel, with
     thirty-three pupils, and the prospect of not fewer than
     100. But salaries of all grades are lower here than in
     Calcutta; and instead of eight Rs. for each boy, as there,
     we can only charge four Rs. So that we shall have more to
     struggle with here. But the work is, I trust, indeed of
     God, and will prosper. The new Roman Catholic Bishop and
     his Chaplain, had opened a school near where ours is, and
     had about forty boys, most of them sons of Protestants, who
     will now come to us again.”

The school here referred to, is that now called by the Bishop’s name,
and was in fact, the resuscitation of a school known as the “Parental
Academy,” but which had been closed for nearly two years, in
consequence of the inability of the managing Committee to meet with
a suitable master. On its being merged in the Madras Grammar School,
the former laws of the Academy were remodelled, and a general outline
of a course of instruction prescribed; the whole being accomplished
mainly at the suggestion or by the assistance of the Bishop.

It was also about this time that the attention of Bishop Corrie, was
more particularly occupied by a desire to aid in abating the hardship
which Government imposed on the christian servants of the Company,
both civil and military, by obliging them to attend at the religious
festivals of heathen and Mahommedans; and, in some instances,
by calling upon them to present offerings, and to do homage to
senseless and impure idols. Many had been the representations, to
the authorities in England, of the sinfulness connected with this
direct encouragement of idolatry, and the violence which was thus
done to the consciences and feelings of the public servants of
the Government; not to mention the inconsistency of a compulsory
attendance on an unchristian ceremonial, with that toleration which
Government professed to afford to all their subjects in the East.
Wearied out, as it would appear, by the importunity of the aggrieved
parties, the Court of Directors, in a dispatch to the Indian
Governments early in 1833, ordered, among other things

     “That the interference of British functionaries in the
     interior management of native temples; in the customs,
     habits, and religious proceedings of their priests and
     attendants; in the arrangement of their ceremonies, rites,
     and festivals; and generally, in the conduct of their
     interior economy, shall cease.

     “That in all matters relating to their temples, their
     worship, their festivals, their religious practices, and
     their ceremonial observances, our native subjects be
     entirely left to themselves.”

It might have been thought that a dispatch so plain, and direct in
prohibiting any further outrages on the consciences of christians,
would have met with the ready attention of the local Governments
in India; but as regarded Madras, it does not appear that a single
step was taken to carry this positive order into effect. After
submitting, therefore, for three years more to this unaccountable
clinging of Government to Mahommedanism and idolatry, it was resolved
by a numerous body of the clergy, civilians, and military, under the
presidency of Madras, to address the local Government. Accordingly,
a Memorial was drawn up, in which the evils complained of were
enumerated, and the recital of them corroborated by documentary
evidence; and which concluded by respectfully but earnestly praying,
that the instructions of the Court of Directors might be practically
and universally enforced. This document Bishop Corrie was requested
to forward to Government, but in the first instance, he had thought
it better, as a matter of courtesy and good judgment, to submit a
copy of it to the Governor, in his private capacity; and in doing so,
the Bishop pointed out to Sir F. Adam, in what respects the relief
prayed for might, as he thought, be readily conceded. The Governor
was at the time residing on the Nilgherries, but the Bishop’s
courtesy was entirely thrown away, for no notice of any kind was
taken of his communication. In the month of July, therefore, the
Memorial was made public, and signed by about 200 of our countrymen
of all ranks; and on the 6th of August, the Bishop forwarded the
document to the Governor of Madras in Council, accompanied by the
following letter:--

     “I have the honour to transmit to your Excellency in
     Council, at the request of those who have signed it, a
     Memorial, together with the original signatures to it,
     enumerating instances wherein those whose duty it is to
     engage in them, feel themselves aggrieved by practices
     and orders which seem to them contrary to the command of
     God; thereby subjecting them to the painful alternative of
     violating the dictates of their consciences, or incurring
     the displeasure of the Government; and praying, that the
     same toleration and exemptions, which have been long
     granted to their Mahommedan and heathen fellow subjects,
     may be extended to the Christian members of this Presidency.

     “It is my duty to state, that I fully concur in every part
     of the Memorial, and its prayer: and I earnestly hope, that
     it may be thought fitting to concede the full measure of
     relief prayed for; and in respect to such part as rests
     alone with the Government of India to grant, that your
     Excellency in Council will be pleased to transmit the
     Memorial to the Right Honorable the Governor General in
     Council, with your powerful recommendation in its favour.”

For a length of time this Memorial, like the Bishop’s former
communication, was not honoured by any reply. Certain rumours,
however, were afloat, to the effect, that angry feelings had been
stirred up in the mind of the Governor in Council. And this proved
to be the case: for (that the whole history of this transaction
may be brought together) it may be stated, that early in October,
the Bishop received a letter from the Chief Secretary to the
Government, reproaching him in very unbecoming terms, for not
“using his influence to allay the zeal of overheated minds;” and
informing him that both the Memorial and a copy of that letter had
been forwarded to the Governor-general. A communication like this
could have no other effect throughout India, than to produce in
all who knew the parties concerned, and retained the feelings of
gentlemen, a blush of shame for the Governor in Council, and the
government Secretary. As regarded the insulted prelate, it had long
been a settled conviction in his mind, that to be truly civilized a
man must be truly a christian; his natural disposition, therefore,
disposed him to pass over this uncalled-for rudeness, as being but a
common-place manifestation of that want of delicacy and refinement
which characterises every modification of heathenism. But, holding
as he did an official station in the country, it seemed to him that
silence under such circumstances might be a compromise of the respect
due to his office; and therefore, as soon as the Bishop learnt that
a copy of this letter to him had been sent to Calcutta, he addressed
the following


                 TO THE RIGHT HON. THE LORD AUCKLAND.

     “On my return to this Presidency a few days since, I first
     learnt that the Right Hon. the Governor of Madras in
     Council, had, together with a Memorial on the subject of
     religious toleration, thought good to send to your Lordship
     in Council, a copy of a letter dated October 11, addressed
     to me, and which I had concluded was intended only for
     the information of the Memorialists. In that letter the
     Governor has been pleased to admonish me as to the duty
     my office imposed upon me, with reference to the said
     Memorial. The authority of Government to dictate to me as
     to the performance of my duties, I entirely deny. I hold
     myself free to act on my own judgment, as to what is my
     duty; and differing entirely as I do from the Right Hon.
     the Governor of Madras in Council, both as to the propriety
     of granting the toleration prayed for by the Memorialists,
     and as to the consequence of deferring to grant the relief
     sought, I consider myself to have strictly been within the
     line of my duty in forwarding the Memorial to Government.

     “On this point, however, I need not have troubled your
     Lordship.

     “My object is to call attention to the fact, that the
     Memorial, which I am told I should have used my influence
     to suppress, was prepared and in circulation for approval
     or correction, at several of the principal stations of this
     Presidency, when I arrived at Madras, in the latter end
     of October, 1835. Copies had been printed for more ready
     circulation, as I afterwards learnt; and in March last,
     one of those copies was put into my hands. Observing that
     officers were employed on services in which I have never
     known Europeans to be employed in the Bengal Presidency, I
     took the liberty to forward privately, early in April last,
     the copy of the Memorial sent me, to the Right Hon. the
     Governor of Madras, then at the Neilgherries, concluding
     that he had the power to grant relief to the military;
     and would, when he knew the pain the performance of those
     duties inflicted, be disposed to take measures to remove
     the occasion of complaint. Of this communication no notice
     was taken.[181]

     “I observe that some of the Calcutta newspapers accuse the
     Memorialists of asking for more toleration than they are
     willing to grant to others; and similar opinions may be
     held in other quarters. I therefore take the liberty, in
     the name of all the clerical subscribers to the Memorial,
     expressly to deny this; and I am persuaded that I speak
     the sentiments of the lay subscribers also on this point.
     If the firing a salute on Christmas day be considered a
     claiming from the natives a concession in favour of our
     religion, let the salute be discontinued; and if there
     be any other ceremony of our religion, on which natives
     are required to attend (though I know not of any) let
     compulsory attendance be forbidden.

     “If the Memorialists have expressed themselves strongly
     respecting the object of some of the ceremonies in which
     they are liable to be called upon to take part, they
     express only their own repugnance to be associated in such
     ceremonies, without the slightest wish to impose restraint
     upon the natives, or to interrupt them in the smallest
     degree in their own observances. That Protestants may be
     exempted from taking part in proceedings, which imply the
     violation of their own peculiar principles, is the only
     desire of the Memorialists.

     “In the hope that the information now conveyed may reach
     your Lordship before the subject of the Memorial is decided
     upon in Council, I have the honour &c.”

This letter was dispatched to Calcutta toward the end of November,
and was courteously acknowledged by Lord Auckland; but before the
official reply to the Memorial was made public in Madras, and in
which the conduct of that Government to the Bishop was faintly
reprehended, the Bishop was beyond the reach of further insult.

On Friday, Aug. 26, 1836, Bishop Corrie held his primary Visitation
in the Cathedral at Madras. The sermon on the occasion was preached
by the Bishop’s examining Chaplain, the Rev. J. Tucker, Fellow of
Corpus Christi College, Oxford. The Charge, after some preliminary
notices of what had been effected by those prelates who had
previously held Visitations in Madras, proceeded to touch upon the
subject of caste among the professedly Christian natives. On this
point the Bishop stated it to be his decided opinion, that those who
were engaged in missionary labours should require from all natives
desirous of baptism, an explicit avowal, that they regarded all
for whom Christ died as spiritually equal in Christ. The Bishop
adverted also to the subject of education, and spoke of the necessity
of uniting religious instruction with intellectual improvement. He
strongly recommended catechetical instruction, as a means of great
usefulness. As important auxiliaries to ministerial labours, he
mentioned several Societies with approbation; and suggested with
regard to Visiting Societies, whether paid agency might not be
beneficially employed.

The Bishop then alluded to the prospects of Christianity in India;
and whilst recognizing the good feeling which prompted some persons
to desire that christians of every denomination should unite to
spread the gospel among the heathen, he yet regarded such an union as
impracticable. He noticed, moreover, the subject of admitting persons
into Holy Orders, and expressed it to be his opinion that a competent
degree of learning should be found among the general body of the
clergy. Although there might be circumstances under which a Bishop in
India would have to be content with a lower standard of acquirements
in candidates for the ministry, yet, it was his opinion, that at
the very least a Bishop ought to demand a fair English education, a
thorough knowledge of history, chronology, the prophetical parts of
scripture, and of the evidences by which the Bible is proved to be
the word of God; besides a full acquaintance with the doctrines of
our Church, and a general knowledge of the arguments by which its
polity may be vindicated.

After referring to the age at which the Bishop wished young persons
to be presented for Confirmation, and mentioning some arrangements
and regulations he hoped to establish respecting the celebration of
marriages, the Bishop concluded his Charge by putting his Clergy in
mind of the great importance of self-devotion to the work of their
ministry.

With reference to this meeting of his clergy, the Bishop observes in
a memorandum, dated

     “Aug. 30, 1836. On Friday last I held my first Visitation.
     Preparing a Charge was a matter of much anxiety; especially
     as the Bishop of Calcutta had entered so minutely, in
     his Charge of Dec. 1834, into all particulars connected
     with ministerial duty, and with the circumstances of this
     country. By God’s goodness I accomplished my purpose, and
     must leave the result to God. In the evening, the Clergy
     dined with me, in number, including some catechists,
     twenty. I now desire to consider what may be the proper
     objects of my journey to the out-stations. 1st. The
     encouragement of the pious, by preaching, conversation,
     and joining in religious exercises. 2nd. The examination
     of schools, and confirming the young, and exhorting them,
     both before and after Confirmation. 3rd. By endeavouring
     to set right many points of litigation; and to establish,
     if possible, a good understanding between Chaplains and
     military Commanders. There is at present much irritation
     on that point; and the Government is disposed to act very
     arbitrarily towards Chaplains. In all these attempts, may
     my sufficiency be of God, and His strength perfected in my
     great weakness!”

The day following the date of this memorandum, the Bishop prepared
to leave Madras for the purpose of visiting some of the out-stations.
The places he purposed to visit were Wallajabad, Arnee, Arcott,
Vellore, to Bangalore; thence to Bellary, Hyderabad, Masulipatam,
returning down the coast to the presidency. The following notices of
his visitation were drawn up, after his return to Madras:--

     “I left Madras, accompanied by the venerable Archdeacon
     Harper, on the evening of August 31st. Our first visit was
     to Wallajabad. Every thing appeared well conducted in this
     important Institution.[182] The youths, eighty-seven in
     number, with the other members of the establishment, were
     assembled for Divine service, and the orderly behaviour,
     and cheerful appearance of the boys, manifested that Mr.
     Hall, the sub-conductor in charge, deserves the good
     opinion which has been entertained of him. He deserves also
     much credit on account of his attention to the religious
     instruction of the boys.

     “All that seems wanting is a good school-master, with
     leisure to the boys from their respective drills for two
     hours each day, (which at present is not allowed) for
     receiving instruction in reading, writing, &c. with a small
     suitable library, which might be supplied at very little
     expense. The good to be effected by this institution has
     already begun to appear in the young men already appointed
     to Corps. At Vellore we found a set of the Wallajabad
     youths attached to the 25th N. I. of whose general good
     conduct the adjutant spoke in high terms. Another set was
     at Bangalore, who were also well spoken of, and from the
     26th N. I. the adjutant writes, since my return to Madras,
     ‘the sixteen drummers and fifers, all protestants, from the
     depôt at Wallajabad, are the most promising youths of the
     kind I have ever yet seen.

     “At Arnee there is no place of worship for the soldiers
     to assemble in--a temporary place erected by subscription
     of the officers and privates, had lately been blown down.
     A small building erected at the expense of the pious
     soldiers, and capable of holding only 150 or 200 persons,
     was used for the services connected with the Confirmation.
     The Chaplain of Arcot attends alternate Sundays, there
     being no house at Arnee in which he can reside. He had
     been indefatigable and successful in preparing candidates
     for Confirmation, of whom seventy-one were confirmed;
     several being rejected as too young, and some because of
     unestablished moral habits. Should a regiment be again
     stationed here, a suitable though temporary building should
     be erected for public worship.

     “A Temperance Society of about sixty members exists in H.
     M. 41st Regiment.

     “At Arcot, the church is small, but in good order. The
     interior arrangements are not well done, so that much
     room is lost. Thirty-two persons were confirmed, all East
     Indians, including a few from Vellore. Here the care of
     the Chaplain, as at Arnee, appeared in the intelligence
     manifested by the young people of Arcot, beyond those of
     Vellore. At Vellore, the whole christian community attended
     Divine Service on Tuesday, 6th September. The place used
     for Divine service is part of an old palace, which requires
     being better fitted up. A school, containing seventy-two
     children, including a few natives, is supported by
     subscription, raised at the station. At Vellore, is also a
     congregation of about 125 natives, including a few families
     of European pensioners, who are attended to by a native
     Catechist of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel,
     and assemble in a small, but neat chapel, belonging to that
     Society.

     “A peon should be allowed here, to take care of the
     burying-ground, which was in a neglected state.

     “At Bangalore, I remained from the 9th to the 20th
     September. During that time, I found that the schools
     and hospitals of the different Corps, had been regularly
     visited by the Chaplains. A Temperance Society is in
     existence, containing nearly 200 members. A charity-school
     for boys, and another for girls, unconnected with the army,
     each containing about twelve scholars, (who are boarded and
     clothed also,) are supported by voluntary contributions.
     A Friend-in-Need Society is also in operation, in which
     relief is provided for sick natives, and money weekly
     disbursed in small sums to the needy of that class. The
     Chaplains have the superintendance of these institutions,
     assisted by a Committee of the resident gentlemen.

     “The regular Sunday services are, one at seven, for one of
     H. M. regiments, and the Artillery horse and foot with the
     Christians connected with the native troops. At eleven,
     a service in the barrack of the regiment, for those who
     may not have attended in the morning at church--and one
     service at eleven in church, and at quarter past six in the
     evening for the station generally. The attendance at these
     voluntary services is better than at any station in India.
     Ninety-eight persons were confirmed, and there were no less
     than 104 communicants.

     “From the inconvenient structure of a barrack-room, as
     well as from the associations connected with it, much of
     the benefit of Divine service is lost to the troops in the
     barracks. I, therefore, at the desire of several of the
     residents, advocated the erection of another[183] place
     of worship, in a situation more convenient also for the
     Artillery and Dragoons; and received considerable support
     towards the attainment of that end. A place should also be
     fitted up in the Fort, where many Christians connected with
     the arsenal and public offices reside, and where one of the
     Chaplains should officiate one evening in the week.

     “A congregation of about forty native Christians
     assemble in the church at nine on Sunday mornings, and
     are ministered to by a catechist of the Society for the
     Propagation of the Gospel.

     “I remained from 23rd Sep. to Oct. 3rd at Bellary. This
     is a large and important field of labour for a clergyman,
     but there has been no Chaplain here for about three
     years past; and one consequence appeared in the smaller
     number of candidates, compared with the population, for
     Confirmation. Of the fifty who were confirmed, about one
     half were unconnected with the army. Beside the regimental
     school, which is well conducted, a charity school of about
     forty children is supported by voluntary contributions
     at the station, and a Society is in operation for the
     relief of poor and sick natives. About 150 rupees a month
     are expended in this way. Of the soldiers of H. M. 55th,
     I found a few in communion with the missionaries of the
     London Missionary Society at Bellary, and about fifteen
     or twenty in connection with the Wesleyan Methodists.
     Sixty-four persons attended the communion on Sunday,
     October 2nd, of whom a considerable number were from the
     private soldiers.

     “Since my visit to Bellary, I learn that an officer of
     the Brigadier General’s Staff, reads prayers and a sermon
     in church on Sunday mornings, and that the attendance is
     considerable. The church at this station needs enlarging;
     and contributions in aid of the Church-building Fund were
     set on foot to assist in meeting the necessary outlay. The
     presence of a Chaplain is greatly desired by the residents,
     and Ghooty and Cuddapah in this district, should be visited
     by him.

     “I remained at Hyderabad and stations dependent on it,
     from Oct. 8 to the 25th. Beside the regimental school
     at Secunderabad, a station school is maintained by
     subscription, in which about forty boys, of whom seven
     are entirely maintained by the charity, are educated in
     English, Teloogoo, and Hindoostanee--also a large class of
     Teloogoo boys, and a few Tamil boys.

     “At Bolaram, in a school, about fifty boys, Christians,
     Mahommedans, and Hindoos, are instructed in English, and
     nearly an equal number in Teloogoo; the expences of which
     are supplied partly by subscription, but chiefly by the
     Nizam’s Government. An English school of about twenty boys
     is maintained at the Residency. The Scriptures, in their
     respective languages, are read in all the classes.

     “There are two services in church at Secunderabad on
     Sundays. The church here, as at Bellary, is far too small
     for the European congregation. A subscription in aid of the
     Church-building Fund was commenced here. A congregation of
     native Christians also assemble in the church on Sundays at
     9 A. M.: a native Catechist reads prayers, and a prepared
     sermon, in Tamil. This congregation consists of about
     ninety members.

     “A Society for the relief of poor natives is also in
     operation here. About forty sick are usually entertained at
     a time till they get well; and, in all, about 150 rupees
     a month, expended on the indigent natives. On Wednesday,
     the 16th October, 141 natives, including 16 native
     Christians, were confirmed; and, on the following Sunday,
     110 communicants attended at the Lord’s Table.

     “At this station, the services of a second Chaplain are
     greatly required. Besides one of H. M. regiments, two
     companies of Artillery, and the European details of a
     regiment of Cavalry, and of four regiments of Native
     Infantry, with their schools and hospitals, are to be
     attended to. In addition to which, the Christians connected
     with the Residency, and some engaged in mercantile pursuits
     on the one hand, and Bolaram with its 180 Christians, all
     Protestants, except one family, on the other hand, should
     be visited on alternate Sundays.

     “Jaulna, also within this district, is a large station, and
     should have a Chaplain appointed to it as soon as possible.

     “At Masulipatam I remained from Oct. 26 till Nov. 8th.
     Here, as at Bellary, there has been no resident Chaplain
     for several years. The school in the Pettah, founded by Dr.
     Roy, is at a stand; and no means of education are supplied
     in the Fort, but by a very aged and nearly superannuated
     pensioned sergeant. Prayers are read, and a sermon once on
     Sundays, in the Fort Church by the Fort adjutant, and in
     the Pettah chapel by a Civil servant.

     “The most urgent desire was expressed here, as at Bellary,
     by the principal residents, for a resident Chaplain.

     “On Friday, 4th of November, forty young persons were
     confirmed, and on the 6th, upwards of forty attended the
     Sacrament. A Chaplain is much needed here, not only on
     account of the number of Protestants at the Station, but
     also on account of the several out-stations in this, and
     neighbouring districts.

     “Passed Sunday, the 13th of November, at Nellore. About
     sixty persons attended Divine Service in the Court House,
     of whom fourteen remained to receive the Sacrament.
     Returned to Madras on November 15th.

     “The number of persons confirmed by me at the different
     stations, amounts to 430; and since my return to Madras,
     I have confirmed in the Cathedral 139,[184] and at the
     Poonamalee 48, almost all of the newly-arrived recruits,
     making a total of 617; of whom not above twenty were native
     Christians. The remainder Europeans, or descendants of
     Europeans.

     “Archdeacon Harper rendered me the most efficient
     assistance during my visitation, in inspecting the
     Registers, and enquiring into the state of the Churches
     and burial-grounds at the different Stations, as well as
     inspecting schools, and visiting the sick in hospital. At
     Bellary and Masulipatam, the labours of the Archdeacon were
     very heavy in examining the candidates for Confirmation,
     and baptizing many children, and attending several
     marriages. Without his aid, my Visitation, imperfect as
     this my first essay may have been, would have been far more
     defective.

     “I have to acknowledge the most ready and obliging
     attentions of all the Authorities, both civil and military,
     with whom my duties brought me into connection.

     “In general, I found at each station a considerable
     prevalence of true religious feeling and practice,
     especially among the soldiers of His Majesty’s regiments,
     and the Artillery. Temperance Societies are found to be
     greatly aiding towards the moral improvement of the army;
     and though from human infirmity the pledge is too often
     broken, yet many examples of improvement of character, and
     benefit to health, appear connected with these Societies,
     and the general good of society is forwarded by them.

     “A farther proof of the prevalence of Christian principles,
     is the existence of associations for the relief of the
     native poor, connected with the several stations. I should
     have noticed in its proper place an association of this
     kind at Masulipatam also. I have known considerable sums
     contributed at different stations, for the relief of native
     poor on particular emergencies; but this permanent care
     for the native poor, is a manifest improvement in European
     society.

     “These associations have in every case I am acquainted
     with, arisen under the care of a Clergyman, and supply
     evidence of the benefit that might arise to the country
     generally, were the Ecclesiastical Establishment properly
     kept up.

     “The deficiency in the number of Chaplains is greatly
     felt, and deeply to be lamented. Not only are several
     large stations without the means of grace, but smaller
     stations are left without occasional visits of Chaplains,
     and whole provinces without any appearance of regard by the
     Government for their spiritual and eternal good. I would
     earnestly request[185] the attention of the Honourable
     Court of Directors to this most important subject.

     “Sixteen Chaplains only are at their posts, and two are
     sick (the Reverend Messrs. Cubitt and Græme.) Besides
     the stations now supplied, and those I have enumerated
     as calling for Chaplains, formerly there was a Chaplain
     at each of the following stations, Poonamatee, Chittoor,
     Vellore, Tellicherry, and Palamcottah. The circumstances of
     most of these stations are somewhat altered; but connected
     with each of them are other stations, which were visited
     occasionally by the Chaplains, nearly all of which are now
     without the ordinances of religion.”

Besides the information which these notices convey respecting the
Bishop’s proceedings on his Visitation, many additional particulars
of a more private nature are contained in his correspondence with his
wife and relatives. In several of his letters, he complains of having
had to undergo excessive fatigue, and from Secunderabad writes to
Mrs. Corrie:--

     “I am desired by Dr. Meikle to ‘keep quiet’ for a day or
     two. He says, I have been over-exerting myself, whilst my
     feeling is that I do nothing to purpose. May God glorify
     Himself in His very poor servant!”

The fact was, that in travelling by _dawk_ from the banks of the
Kistoor to Hyderabad, the journey was performed chiefly in the night,
and the Bishop’s rest was consequently disturbed at almost every
stage, by natives of rank, who came to pay their respects to him.
When entreated by the Archdeacon to spare himself, by declining these
civilities, the Bishop’s usual reply was, “When these good people
put themselves to so much inconvenience on my account, how can I
do less than get out of my palankeen, and exchange a kind word with
them?” In a letter, however, which the Bishop on his return to Madras
wrote to Mr. Sherer, he observes, “I must not, if spared, make again
so hurried a journey. Time is doing its work with me.” Yet very soon
after this, all thought of his own health was absorbed in his anxiety
respecting that of his wife, who had become so enfeebled as to render
it necessary that a sea-voyage should be attempted, as the only human
means likely to save her life. But before arrangements could be made
for carrying this object into effect, she became suddenly worse; and
after two or three days of suffering, died on the 21st of December
1836, in the hope of eternal life through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Bishop drew up, and printed for private circulation, a short
account of his wife’s last illness. There are contained in that
account, passages of much interest, but which cannot here be
transcribed: the substance of all is contained in a single sentence
of a memorandum, penned by the surviving mourner himself, dated

     “Dec. 24, 1836. When the likelihood of her departure began
     to be manifest, the Saviour alone was her only ground of
     hope towards God, and that hope sustained her in peace,
     though there was nothing of triumph.”

As regarded his own feelings in connection with this heavy domestic
trial, the Bishop adds:--

     “My feelings of loneliness are indescribable. All before me
     appears blank; I seem cut off from all earthly good. All
     this I feel I deserve at the hand of God. He might justly
     have cast me into the blackness of darkness for ever.
     Just, therefore, art thou, O Lord, in this dispensation
     which has laid me so low. Teach me, O Lord, to seek
     spiritual improvement in it, and let it prove to me ‘loving
     correction!’”

With reference to this mournful event, the Bishop also observes in
the last letter which he lived to address


                           TO HIS BROTHER.

     “You cannot understand the change it [his wife’s death] has
     wrought in every circumstance of my life; and how at every
     turn a sense of loss is forced upon me. Yet you have felt
     an aching void on the death of our own parents and near
     connections, and can judge of the intensity of pain I at
     times experience. I will not dwell longer on the subject. I
     have everything which Christian faith and hope can supply,
     as to the gain my wife has entered upon, but my own sense
     of loss prevents, as yet, the consolation I might otherwise
     possess.”

The necessary occupations, however, connected with his official
duties, tended, in some measure, to lessen the Bishop’s keen sense of
his bereavement. Among those duties, not the least engrossing, was an
Ordination of which he had given notice, previously to Mrs. Corrie’s
decease. The Ordination took place on Sunday the 8th of January
1837. The candidates who presented themselves for Holy Orders were
missionaries about to be employed by the Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel--three for Deacon’s Orders and three for Priest’s.
Respecting these candidates the Bishop remarks, in the letter just
quoted, “both Mr. Tucker and the Archdeacon were well satisfied with
their attainments, as they have just cause to be with their piety.”
The Bishop himself preached the Ordination Sermon, from Ephes. iv.
11, 12; and took occasion thence to point out the existence of the
ministry, as a distinctly-instituted Office in the Church of God
throughout all time; explaining, also, the object and end of that
Office, and the solemn responsibility attached to it.

It is stated by one who was present on the occasion, that the Sermon
was “marked by lucid simplicity, pathos, fervour, and power; mingled
with kindly feelings toward other bodies of professing Christians.”
And as the opportunity for witnessing the admission, at one time,
of so many persons into the Christian ministry, had never before
occurred in southern India, the Cathedral was crowded throughout all
its usual accommodations.

During this month, also, the attention of the Bishop was a good
deal occupied with the subject of a new Church for _St. Thomè_. In
the preceding June he had addressed a letter to the Society for
promoting Christian Knowledge, stating that

     “At _St. Thomè_, the original European settlement in
     this place, is an immense population of all classes;
     Hindoos, Mahommedans, Portuguese Christians, and very
     many East Indians baptised in the Established Church,
     and many connected with the Vepery congregation, distant
     four or five miles. Bishop Turner, when here, supplied
     money to purchase a piece of ground on which to erect a
     place of worship: the purchase was made and the ground
     lies waste. No further attempt has been made towards
     providing Christian instruction for those hundreds who are
     professedly of our communion.”

He undertook, therefore, to ask the aid of the Society
above-mentioned, toward building a Church for this
spiritually-destitute population; and was so sanguine of the success
of his application, that toward the end of January, he visited
_St. Thomè_, attended by the Archdeacon and the Rev. W. Taylor,
for the purpose of surveying the ground and examining localities.
He afterwards requested Mr. Taylor to prepare the heading of a
subscription-paper, the first name appended to which the Bishop
purposed to be that of “A Friend,” with a subscription of 1000
rupees; that “Friend” having placed a considerable sum at the
Bishop’s disposal. Meanwhile, the Society in England entered most
readily into his views, contributing from their funds all the sum he
stated to be required: but intelligence of that liberality was not
destined to gladden his spirit, for his earthly career was now fast
drawing to a close.

The Bishop, as has been observed, had complained of great fatigue
and exhaustion, when on his Visitation; but it appears that when at
Hyderabad, in October 1836, he had suffered also from a pain in the
head, which came on suddenly, and was so acute as to oblige him to
have recourse to medical advice. From that time this pain never left
him; and the constant and peculiar manner in which it affected him,
was only not much noticed because he attributed it all to the anxiety
of mind he had gone through, on account of his wife. During several
weeks, however, the Bishop had been frequently observed to make it a
matter of supplication at family-prayer, that himself and household
“might be prepared for any sudden or unexpected events which might
await them; and might be, moreover, enabled to bear all in a holy
temper of mind.” Nor did his petitions prove to be unseasonable: for
on Tuesday, January 31st, when on his way to the Fort, in company
with the Archdeacon, for the purpose of attending there a meeting
of the Committee of the Society for propagating the Gospel, he was
seized with an unusual giddiness, which prevented him from reading
a paper he had in hand. On reaching the vestry of the Fort church,
he suffered very much from pain in the head, and sickness, and was
altogether so ill that the Archdeacon (who scarcely ever afterwards
left him) had him conveyed home, and medical aid sent for. After
leeches had been applied to the head, the Bishop seemed to recover a
little from the state of stupor in which he was found to be on first
reaching his house; but, except at intervals, he was only partially
conscious throughout the four remaining days of his life. When,
however, he seemed to revive somewhat, he manifested great pleasure
at having passages of scripture read to him. And even on Saturday
Feb. 4th, (the day before he died) when sight and consciousness were
well nigh gone, he yet indicated his cordial assent to different
texts of Scripture which his daughter repeated to him. More
particularly when she read Isaiah xii. “I will say, O Lord, I will
praise thee,” &c. he asked her to recite Cowper’s paraphrase:

    I will praise Thee every day
    Now thine anger’s turned away;
    Comfortable thoughts arise
    From the bleeding sacrifice.

    Here, in the fair gospel-field,
    Wells of free salvation yield,
    Streams of life, a plenteous store,
    And my soul shall thirst no more.

    Jesus is become at length
    My salvation and my strength;
    And his praises shall prolong,
    While I live, my pleasant song.

    Praise ye, then, his glorious name
    Publish his exalted fame!
    Still is work your praise exceeds
    Excellent are all his deeds.

    Raise again the joyful sound
    Let the nations roll it round!
    Zion shout, for this is He,
    God the Saviour dwells in thee:

and himself repeated “From the bleeding sacrifice.” To the text
“Behold the Lamb of God;” &c. he answered “Yes;” and on her adding
“Him hath God exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour;” the Bishop
remarked, “A Prince and a Saviour on _all_ occasions.” At another
time when his daughter read, “I am the resurrection and the life;”
&c. he asked, “Believest thou this?” Then when 1 John iii. 2, had
been suggested to him, the dying prelate repeated several times “We
shall see Him as He is.” The last Scripture of which he seemed to be
conscious, was Rev. v. 13. “Blessing, and honour, and glory, &c., be
unto the Lamb for ever and ever;” and in this spirit of praise and
thanksgiving he appears to have passed into eternity, for his last
words were, “For ever,”--“For ever.” And so this servant of Christ
entered into rest on the morning of Sunday, Feb. 5, 1837, in the 59th
year of his age.

The _post-mortem_ examination of the body exhibited a solid
_coagulum_ of blood, of the size of a turkey’s egg, situate on
the right side of the brain, in its substance. The situation and
appearance of the _coagulum_, when taken in connexion with the
circumstance that the Bishop always felt the pain in the same
spot, led the medical men to conclude that the disease was of some
standing: that it originated, in fact, in the fatigue and anxiety
connected with his Visitation.

The remains of Bishop Corrie were interred in the Cathedral
burial-ground, on the evening of the day of his death. The funeral
procession was led by the scholars of the Madras Grammar School, of
which the Bishop was Patron, and which had been so much indebted to
his fostering care. Then followed Gericke’s scholars, and the pupils
of the Vepery School; and these were succeeded by a train of Native
Catechists. After them, and immediately preceding the coffin, came
the Archdeacon and Clergy. The pall was borne by six gentlemen of
rank; and the Governor of the Presidency followed as Chief Mourner,
supported by the Chief Justice, and the Commander-in-Chief. The
Bishop was deposited by the side of Mrs. Corrie, and within a few
feet of the spot where, six weeks before, he had stood a widowed
mourner over his wife’s remains.

On Monday, 6th February, the Governor in Council issued an Order
expressive of his sense of “the respect which the unaffected piety,
benevolence and exemplary life” of the deceased Prelate “had
universally inspired.” This order appeared in the Government Gazette
on the 7th February;[186] and, on the following day, a public
meeting, at which the Governor presided, was held in the College
Hall, for the purpose of considering the most appropriate mode of
expressing the feelings with which the late Bishop was regarded by
the inhabitants of the Presidency. This meeting resolved to set on
foot a subscription, in order to raise funds for erecting a monument
in the Cathedral to the Bishop’s memory: and it was further agreed
that any surplus of the funds raised for the monument should be
devoted to the founding of scholarships at the Grammar School, to
be called “Corrie Scholarships.”[187] The Committee of the Madras
Grammar School now resolved also, that their Institution should in
future be designated “Bishop Corrie’s Grammar School.”--Funds having
accordingly been raised sufficient for the purposes specified, a
monument was executed by the skill and good taste of Mr. Henry
Weekes, which is now in the Cathedral of Madras.

Nor were the Calcutta friends of the deceased Bishop backward
to testify their regard for his worth. For at a public meeting,
which was held on the 16th March, in the Town Hall, Bishop Wilson
being in the chair, it was resolved to solicit subscriptions for
the purpose of erecting marble slabs, both in the old Church and
in the Cathedral, to the memory of the deceased Prelate; and for
the purchase of a Portrait of him. It was, moreover, resolved to
appropriate any surplus funds derived from such subscriptions, to the
founding of scholarships in the Calcutta High School, to be called
“Bishop Corrie’s Scholarships.”[188] And all these tokens of respect
were in due time effected.

In Ceylon, also, a general meeting was called at the King’s house,
Colombo, by His Excellency the Governor, at which, subscriptions were
entered into for the purpose of erecting a monument to the Bishop’s
memory in St. Peter’s Church, Colombo, and for founding scholarships,
which should bear his name, in the Grammar School at Madras. Both
which objects were accomplished.[189]

Thus terminated the earthly labours of the first Bishop of Madras,
after a brief but not unimportant episcopate, if a judgment may be
formed from the amount of good effected, from the general gloom which
the Bishop’s decease cast over the whole Presidency, and the respect
with which his memory was cherished. To those who were intimately
acquainted with Bishop Corrie, it will not excite surprise that his
death should have called forth all the public manifestations of
sorrow and respect, which have here been recited. For after making
every abatement for that human sinfulness and infirmity from which he
was not exempt, there still remained to him more than an ordinary
share of natural kindness of heart, benevolence of disposition, and
warmth of affection; so that he could not but be generally beloved.
Nor will the reader of these pages be disposed to question that
Bishop Corrie will long be remembered in India, as the man of God,
through whose instrumentality originated much of the moral good
which, since his time, has been slowly spreading itself over that
land of darkness and superstition.[190] But chiefly, it is believed,
will his name he held in honour throughout our Eastern Empire, as
one of that small band of heroic spirits who, in self-devotion to
Christ and zeal for the extension of the Redeemer’s kingdom, manfully
struggled against difficulties and discouragements of which we can
form but an inadequate estimate:--who never suffered themselves to
doubt but that the cause they had by grace espoused would still go
on and prosper, until “at the name of Jesus every knee should bow,
and every tongue confess that He is Lord, unto the glory of God the
Father.”


      [180] The meeting was held in the College Hall, at Madras,
            on the 6th of June.

      [181] The following was the communication here mentioned:
            “The accompanying [Memorial] was brought to me a
            few days since with a request that I would join in
            a representation to Government on the subject of
            its contents. I have always abstained from taking
            part in such representations, being aware that
            Government may have good reasons for measures,
            which the public cannot be acquainted with; and, in
            respect of interference with Pagodas, &c., I have
            the fullest confidence that Government will pursue
            the course which appears wise and proper. But with
            reference to the Christian military servants of the
            State, who are occasionally compelled to do honour
            to the superstitions of the country, I am persuaded
            you will not take amiss my bringing the case to
            your notice. I have marked the statements in the
            printed paper which seem to require relief, with
            the instances cited in the Appendix, assured that
            your own benevolent regard for the feelings of the
            Christian soldiery will bring them all the relief
            that is desirable.”

      [182] A school for country-born children, who received a
            Christian education, and became fifers, &c. to the
            Company’s Native troops. The school was afterwards
            removed to Arcot.

      [183] About 1000 rupees were, in consequence, collected
            toward another building; but it does not appear that
            since the Bishop’s time any Church has been erected
            there.

      [184] The Confirmation in the Cathedral was held on
            Wednesday, Nov. 30, 1836.

      [185] It is satisfactory to know that this request has
            been attended to.

      [186] See Appendix I.

      [187] See Appendix II.

      [188] See Appendix III.

      [189] See Appendix IV.

      [190] See Appendix V.




                             CORRIGENDA.


   Page 39 line 21, for enable, _read_ unable.
    --  48  --   5, at Chunar--at Berhampore, _read_ to Chunar--
                                                     to Berhampore.
    --  59  --  33, for Scirptures, _read_ Scriptures.
    -- 149 note,    -- Jounarain,     -- Joy Narain.
    -- 176  --      -- Tumna,         -- Jumna.
    -- 298 line 15, -- point,         -- points.
    -- 304  --  21, -- exeeeding,     -- exceeding.
    -- 311  --  32, -- Narian,        -- Narain.
    -- 519  --   2, -- Culcutta,      -- Calcutta.




                              APPENDIX.


                                  I.

The following notice appeared in the Government Gazette of Feb. 7th,
1837:--

“With feelings of unfeigned sorrow, the Right Honorable the Governor
in Council, records the demise of the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of
Madras. The Venerable Prelate expired at half past three o’clock, on
the morning of Sunday last. As a tribute of respect to his memory,
the flag of the garrison was hoisted half-staff-high during the day,
and on the funeral procession leaving his Lordship’s late residence,
fifty-nine minute guns, corresponding with the age of the deceased,
were fired from the Fort battery.

“His Lordship’s remains were attended to the grave by the Right
Honorable the Governor, the Judges of the Supreme Court, His
Excellency the Commander-in-chief, the members of Council, all the
principal civil and military functionaries at the Presidency, and
an immense concourse of all classes of the community; desirous of
manifesting the feeling of respect which the unaffected piety,
benevolence and exemplary conduct of the Bishop, had universally
inspired.

“Published by order of the Right Honourable the Governor in Council.

                               “(Signed) H. Chamier, Chief Secretary.”


                                 II.

On Wednesday evening, Feb. 8th, 1837, a public meeting was held at
the College, for the purpose of considering the fittest mode of
testifying the regard and respect entertained for the character of
the late Bishop Corrie.

The Right Honourable the Governor in the chair. The following
resolutions were proposed and carried unanimously:--

     1st. That a subscription be entered into for the purpose
       of erecting a monument in the Cathedral at Madras to the
       memory of the Right Rev. the late Lord Bishop of the
       Diocese.
         Proposed by Sir F. Adam.
         Seconded by Sir. R. Comyn.

     2nd. That after setting aside a sum sufficient to defray
       the expences of the monument, the residue form a fund
       for the endowment of scholarships, to be called, “Bishop
       Corrie’s scholarships,” in Bishop Corrie’s Grammar school.
         Proposed by Sir P. Maitland.
         Seconded by Mr. Sullivan.

     3rd. That a Committee be formed for the purpose of carrying
       the above resolutions into effect, and that it be composed
       of the following gentlemen: Sir P. Maitland, Mr. Sullivan,
       the Archdeacon, and Col. Cadell.
         Proposed by Sir E. Gambier.
         Seconded by

     4th. That Messrs. Arbuthnot and Co. be requested to
       undertake the office of Treasurers.
         Proposed by the Archdeacon.
         Seconded by Captain Dalrymple.

     5th. Thanks to the Chairman (for his kindness in taking the
       chair and for his able conduct in it) having been proposed
       by Brigadier General Doveton, and seconded by Colonel
       Waugh, the meeting was dissolved.


                                 III.

     At a public Meeting of the friends of the late Bishop of
       Madras, held at the Town Hall, [Calcutta] on March 16, 1837. It
       was resolved,

     1st. That this Meeting has heard with the deepest regret of
       the demise of the Bishop of Madras, and consider it a duty
       which they owe to the Church of which he was so distinguished a
       member, to raise some token of regard to his character at this
       Presidency, which was the scene of his arduous labours, and his
       preeminent example for almost thirty years.

     2nd. That Subscriptions be solicited for the purpose of
       erecting a Marble Slab in the Old Church, near those of his
       revered friends Brown, Martyn and Thomason, and a similar one in
       the Cathedral; and for painting a likeness of the late Bishop,
       to be hung up in the Old Church Rooms.

     3rd. That the surplus which may remain after defraying the
       expenses of the Monuments and the Portrait, be appropriated
       for the purpose of endowing Scholarships in the Calcutta High
       School, to be called “Bishop Corrie’s Scholarships,” and
       that especial regard be had in the nomination, to eventual
       preparation for Missionary labour.

     4th. That a Committee be formed of the following Gentlemen,
       to see these objects carried into effect, viz. to nominate the
       Trustees for the above purposes.
             The Venerable Archdeacon Dealtry,
             Rev. H. Fisher,
             H. M. Pigou, Esq.
             Major G. Hutchinson,
             John Dougal, Esq.
             A. Beattie, Esq.
             C. W. Brietzcke, Esq.
             Rev. R. B. Boswell, Secretary.

     5th. That Messrs. Gisborne and Co. be appointed Treasurers,
       and those who are friendly to the above design, be requested
       to forward their Subscriptions to those Gentlemen as early as
       possible.


Resolution of Committee on 6th April, 1837.

The Committee, understanding that an excellent likeness of the late
Bishop is in the possession of his friends in England,

Resolved that the Secretary be authorised to write to the Rev. George
Corrie, of Catharine Hall, Cambridge, and request him to obtain a
copy of this likeness, executed in the best possible way, and to have
the same suitably framed and transmitted to India with as little
delay as possible.


                                 IV.

At a General Meeting held at the King’s house, Colombo, on March
the 3rd, and again by adjournment on March the 7th, called by His
Excellency the Right Honourable Sir R. W. Horton, Governor of Ceylon,
who presided; it was resolved,


     1st. On the motion of the Rev. B. Bailey, seconded by C. E.
       Layard, Esq.
       That this Meeting cordially approves the objects
       contemplated by the Madras Meeting as recorded in their
       first two Resolutions. (See above p. 632.)

     2nd. On the motion of J. Steuart, Esq., seconded by the Rev.
       Joseph Marsh.
       That the following gentlemen form a Committee, to
       correspond with the Madras Committee, viz.
         The Honourable Mr. Serjeant ROUGH, Chief Justice.
         The Rev. B. BAILEY, SENIOR Colonial Chaplain.
         The Rev. J. H. DE SARAM.
         C. E. LAYARD, Esq.
       and that the Rev. JOSEPH BAILEY, be Treasurer and Secretary.

     3rd. On the motion of C. E. Layard, Esq., seconded by the
       Rev. J. Bailey.
       That a plain marble Tablet to the Memory of the Right
       Rev. DANIEL CORRIE, LL.D. Late Bishop of Madras and
       Ceylon, be placed in St. Peter’s Church, Colombo, at an
       expense not exceeding thirty pounds; and that the balance
       of the subscriptions raised in Ceylon, in excess of such
       sum, be transmitted to the Madras Committee.

     4th. On the motion of the Rev. J. H. De Saram, seconded
       by the Rev. J. Marsh.
       That the Secretary be requested to correspond with the
       Reverend the Clergy at the out-stations of Galle, Kandy,
       Trincomalee, and Jaffna, on the objects of this Meeting.

     5th. On the motion of the Rev. B. Bailey, seconded by C.
       E. Layard, Esq.
       That the thanks of the Meeting be given to His Excellency
       the Governor, for the information he has just given,
       [respecting the proceedings in 1825, connected with
       the founding of a Singhalese Scholarship in Bishop’s
       College, Calcutta] and that he be requested to transmit
       any further information he may obtain on the subject, to
       the members of the Committee, for the regulation of their
       proceedings with respect to CORRIE’S Scholarships.

     6th. On the motion of J. Steuart, Esq., seconded by C. E.
       Layard, Esq.
       That the thanks of this Meeting be given to His
       Excellency the Governor, for the interest he has taken
       in the general objects of this Meeting, and for his able
       conduct in the chair.


                                  V.

The preceding pages bear sufficient testimony to the zeal and
activity of Bishop Corrie, in forwarding every plan for securing
a Christian education to the youth of India. But it is well
known among the deceased Prelate’s friends, that he was in the
habit of translating and compiling school-books for the use of
such Hindoostanee schools as more immediately came under his own
superintendance. It is a matter of regret that the many enquiries
which the Editors of these Memoirs have made, with a view to
obtaining a definite list of the books in question, have been but
partially successful. It may, however, be mentioned that besides
translating into Hindoostanee, Sellon’s Abridgment of Scripture,
Watts’ Catechism, The Assembly’s Shorter Catechism, portions of
Milner’s Church History, &c., the Bishop drew up in English, “A
general Outline of Ancient History,” for the use of the Hindoostanee
youth. A third Edition of this “Outline” was going through the press
at the time of the Bishop’s death; and other Editions have since
then been printed. Among his papers was found, also, a manuscript
translation into Hindoostanee of a brief Church History, by the Rev.
E. Sims, entitled “Christian Records.”




                               THE END.




                LEONARD SEELEY, THAMES DITTON, SURREY.




Transcriber’s Note:

Words may have inconsistent hyphenation in the text. Obsolete and
alternative spellings were left unchanged. Typographical errors noted
in the Corrigenda were not corrected in the referenced text. Other
misspelled words were corrected.

Words and phrases in italics are surrounded by underscores, _like
this_. Footnotes were renumbered sequentially and were moved to
the end of the chapter. Obvious printing errors, such as partially
printed or missing letters and punctuation, were corrected.
Extraneous punctuation was deleted. Duplicate letters at line endings
were removed.

The following were changed:

     changed “56” to “65” in the Table of Contents.
     added “to” ... be so good as to order it ...
     added “of” ... on this side of India.
     changed “not” to “than” ... not less than ...
     added “to” ... reduce the present number of Chaplains to seven ...





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIRS OF THE RIGHT REV. DANIEL CORRIE, LL.D., FIRST BISHOP OF MADRAS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

